Title: Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=lNVHg9npif

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models 

Lucy Xiaoyang Shi 1 2 Brian Ichter 1 Michael Equi 1 Liyiming Ke 1 Karl Pertsch 1 2 3 Quan Vuong 1

James Tanner 1 Anna Walling 1 Haohuan Wang 1 Niccolo Fusai 1 Adrian Li-Bell 1 Danny Driess 1

Lachy Groom 1 Sergey Levine 1 3 Chelsea Finn 1 2 

https://www.pi.website/research/hirobot 

# Abstract 

Generalist robots that can perform a range of dif-ferent tasks in open-world settings must be able to not only reason about the steps needed to ac-complish their goals, but also process complex instructions, prompts, and even feedback dur-ing task execution. Intricate instructions (e.g., “Could you make me a vegetarian sandwich?” or “I don’t like that one”) require not just the ability to physically perform the individual steps, but the ability to situate complex commands and feedback in the physical world. In this work, we describe a system that uses vision-language mod-els in a hierarchical structure, first reasoning over complex prompts and user feedback to deduce the most appropriate next step to fulfill the task, and then performing that step with low-level ac-tions. In contrast to direct instruction following methods that can fulfill simple commands (“pick up the cup”), our system can reason through complex prompts and incorporate situated feed-back during task execution (“that’s not trash”). We evaluate our system across three robotic plat-forms, including single-arm, dual-arm, and dual-arm mobile robots, demonstrating its ability to handle tasks such as cleaning messy tables, mak-ing sandwiches, and grocery shopping. 

# 1. Introduction 

A defining feature of intelligence is its flexibility: people not only excel at complex tasks but also adapt to new situa-tions, modify behaviors in real time, and respond to diverse       

> 1Physical Intelligence 2Stanford University 3University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Physical Intelligence
> <research@physicalintelligence.company >.
> Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).

inputs, corrections, and feedback. Achieving this kind of flexibility is essential for robots in open-ended, human-centric environments. For instance, consider a robot tasked with tidying up a table after a meal: instead of rigidly fol-lowing a single predefined set of steps, the robot would need to interpret dynamic prompts like “only take away someone’s dishes if they are done eating,” respond to cor-rections like “leave it alone,” and adapt when faced with un-familiar challenges, such as a delicate object that requires special handling. This paper aims to advance robotic intel-ligence by enabling robots to interpret and act on diverse natural language commands, feedback, and corrections – a step towards creating agents that reason through tasks, inte-grate human feedback seamlessly, and operate with human-like adaptability. If we can enable a robot to process and engage with complex natural language interaction, we can unlock not only better instruction following, but also the ability for users to guide a robot through new tasks and correct the robot in real time. Achieving this level of flexibility and steerability in robotic systems is challenging. While standard language-conditioned imitation learning can follow simple, atomic instructions such as “pick up the coke can” (Brohan et al., 2022), real-world tasks are rarely so straightforward. Imag-ine a more realistic prompt, such as: “Could you make me a vegetarian sandwich? I’d prefer it without tomatoes. Also, if you have ham or roast beef, could you make a sep-arate sandwich with one of those for my friend?” This re-quires not only understanding the language, but also the ability to situate commands within the current context and compose existing skills (e.g., picking up the roast beef) to solve a new task. If the robot further receives correc-tions and feedback (“that’s not how you do it, you have to get lower, otherwise you’ll keep missing”), these must also be integrated dynamically into task execution. This challenge resembles the distinction between Kahneman’s “System 1” and “System 2” cognitive processes (Kahne-man, 2011). The “automatic” System 1 corresponds to a policy capable of executing straightforward commands by triggering pre-learned skills, while the more deliberative 1Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models   

> Figure 1: Open-ended instruction following. Hi Robot enables robots to follow multi-stage instructions, adapt to real-time corrections and constraints, complete unseen long-horizon tasks, and respond verbally when needed.

System 2 involves higher-level reasoning to parse complex long-horizon tasks, interpret feedback, and decide on an ap-propriate course of action. Prior work in robotic instruction following has largely focused on atomic instructions (Step-puttis et al., 2020; Jang et al., 2022; Brohan et al., 2022), addressing only System 1-level behaviors. In this paper, we address the more intricate reasoning needed for complex prompts and feedback by introducing a hierarchical reasoning system for robotic control based on vision-language models (VLMs). In our system, the robot incorporates complex prompts and language feedback us-ing a VLM, which is tasked with interpreting the current observations and user utterances, and generating suitable verbal responses and atomic commands (e.g., “grasp the cup”) to pass into the low-level policy for execution. This low-level policy is itself a vision-language model finetuned for producing robotic actions, also known as a vision-language-action (VLA) model (Black et al., 2024; Brohan et al., 2023a; Kim et al., 2024; Wen et al., 2024). We expect that robot demonstrations annotated with atomic commands will not be sufficient for training the high-level model to follow complex, open-ended prompts, and we therefore need representative examples of complex prompt following. To acquire this data, we propose to synthetically 

label datasets consisting of robot observations and actions with hypothetical prompts and human interjections that might have been plausible for that situation. To this end, we provide a state-of-the-art vision-language model with a robot observation and target atomic command, and ask it to come up with a prompt or human interaction that may have preceded that observation and command, i.e. gener-ating high-level policy prompts for different outcomes. By incorporating these synthetically-generated but situated ex-amples into high-level policy training, our approach gener-alizes to diverse prompts and interjections while maintain-ing grounding in the robot’s capabilities. The main contribution of our paper is a hierarchical 

interactive robot learning system (Hi Robot), a novel framework that uses VLMs for both high-level reasoning and low-level task execution. We show that our framework enables a robot to process much more complex prompts than prior end-to-end instruction following systems and in-corporate feedback during task execution (Figure 1). While some of the individual components of this system, such as the low-level VLA policy, have been studied in prior work, the combination of these components along with our syn-thetic data generation scheme are novel and enable novel capabilities. We evaluate Hi Robot on diverse robots, in-cluding single-arm, dual-arm, and mobile platforms. Our evaluation requires the robots to perform a variety of tasks, including new combinations of skills seen during training, in the context of scenarios that span cleaning of messy ta-bles, making sandwiches, and grocery shopping. Our ex-periments show that Hi Robot surpasses multiple prior ap-proaches, including using API-based VLMs and flat VLA policies, in both alignment with human intent and task suc-cess. By grounding high-level reasoning in both verbal and physical interaction, Hi Robot paves the way for more in-tuitive and steerable human-robot symbiosis, advancing the potential for flexible intelligence in real-world applications. 

# 2. Related Work 

Our work relates to research on VLMs for robotic control, which we can categorize into two groups: directly training VLMs for robotic control and using VLMs out-of-the-box with pre-defined robot skills. In the former category, meth-ods fine-tune VLMs to output robotic controls based on in-put images and language commands (Brohan et al., 2023a; Wen et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024; Black et al., 2024; Liu 2Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models 

et al., 2024c; Li et al., 2024; O’Neill et al., 2024; Zawal-ski et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2025; Pertsch et al., 2025) . While such methods have demonstrated impressive gener-alization and instruction-following, they are trained for rel-atively simple commands (“put the cup on the plate”). In contrast, we demonstrate tasks with intricate prompts and human interactions that require situated reasoning. In the latter category, a number of methods use LLMs and VLMs to reason over robot observations and commands, and break up multi-stage tasks into simpler steps that can be performed by low-level controllers. Earlier methods of this sort used language models in combination with var-ious learned or hand-designed skills (Huang et al., 2022; Brohan et al., 2023b; Liang et al., 2023; Shah et al., 2024; Singh et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025a), but such systems have limited ability to incorporate complex context, such as image observations, into the reasoning pro-cess. More recently, multiple works have use VLMs to out-put parameters for pre-defined robotic skills (Huang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a; Nasiriany et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024b; Stone et al., 2023; Qiu et al., 2024; Zhi et al., 2024). Such methods can process more complex commands and situate them in the context of visual ob-servations, but these approaches have shown limited phys-ical dexterity and limited ability to incorporate real-time language interaction with humans (with some exceptions discussed below). In contrast, our system utilizes VLMs for both high-level reasoning and low-level control, with a flexible language interface between the two. These de-sign choices, along with a new synthetic data generation scheme, allow our system to achieve both significant phys-ical dexterity and detailed promptability that prior works lack. Many works aim to enable robotic language interaction with users, including model-based systems that parse lan-guage instructions and feedback and ground them via a symbolic representation of the scene (Swadzba et al., 2009; Matuszek et al., 2013; Namasivayam et al., 2023; Patki et al., 2019), and more recent learning-based methods that process feedback directly, typically with a hierarchical ar-chitecture (Liu et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Belkhale et al., 2024; Singh et al., 2024; McCallum et al.; Driess et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2025b). Our work builds on the latter class of methods, where user feedback is incorporated via a high-level policy that provides atomic commands to a learned low-level policy. Unlike OLAF (Liu et al., 2023), which uses an LLM to modify robot trajectories, our approach can incorporate situated corrections based on the robot’s obser-vations, respond to those corrections in real time, and fol-low complex prompts describing dexterous manipulation tasks. While YAY Robot (Shi et al., 2024) can handle sit-uated real-time corrections, it is limited to one prompt and to the corrections seen in the human-written data; our ap-proach leverages VLMs and a new data generation scheme to enable diverse prompts and open-ended corrections. Fi-nally, RACER (Dai et al., 2024) can also incorporate situ-ated corrections, but relies on a physics simulator to con-struct recovery behaviors; our approach only uses real robot demonstrations without intentional perturbations or correc-tions and is applicable to open-ended prompts. 

# 3. Preliminaries and Problem Statement 

A learned policy controls a robot by processing observation inputs, which we denote ot, and producing one or more ac-tions At = [ at, at+1 , ..., at+H−1], where we use At to denote an action chunk consisting of the next H actions to execute (Zhao et al., 2023). Our system takes as input the images from multiple cameras I1 

> t

, ..., Int , the robot’s con-figuration (i.e., joint and gripper positions) qt, and a lan-guage prompt ℓt. Thus, we have ot = [ I1 

> t

, ..., Int , ℓ t, qt],and the policy represents the distribution p(At|ot). Prior works have proposed various methods for representing and training such policies (Zhao et al., 2023; Chi et al., 2023; Octo Model Team et al., 2024; Pertsch et al., 2025). Since our focus will be specifically on complex, multi-stage tasks that require parsing intricate prompts and even dy-namic user feedback, we need our policies to be able to interpret complex language and ground it via observations of the environment. A particularly powerful approach for handling such complex semantics is provided by vision-language-action (VLA) models (Black et al., 2024; Brohan et al., 2023a; Kim et al., 2024; Wen et al., 2024), which use vision-language model (VLM) pre-training to initial-ize the policy p(At|ot). A VLM is a language model that has also been trained to process image inputs, and represents a distribution p(ℓ′|I, ℓ ) – the probability of a language suffix ℓ′ (e.g., an answer to a question) in re-sponse to an image-language prefix consisting of an im-age I and a prompt ℓ (e.g., a visual question). The most commonly used VLMs represent p(ℓ′|I, ℓ ) via an autore-gressive decoder-only Transformer model, factorizing the distribution into a product of autoregressive token proba-bilities p(xt+1 |x1, ..., xt, I), where xt denotes the tth token (not to be confused with a physical time step), and we have 

ℓ = [ x1, ..., xtp ] and ℓ′ = [ xtp+1 , ..., xtp+ts ], with tp the length of the prefix and ts the length of the suffix (Beyer et al., 2024). We also use such Transformer-based VLMs, but since we do not modify their architecture and their au-toregressive structure is therefore not relevant to our dis-cussion, we will use the more concise p(ℓ′|I, ℓ ) notation to represent a standard VLM. A standard VLA is produced by fine-tuning the VLM 

p(ℓ′|I, ℓ ) such that the actions At are represented by tokens in the suffix ℓ′, typically by tokenizing the actions via dis-3Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models   

> Figure 2: Overview of hierarchical VLA. The policy consists of a high-level and a low-level policy. The high-level policy pro-cesses open-ended instructions and images from base and wrist-mounted cameras to generate low-level language commands. The low-level policy uses these commands, images, and robot states to produce actions and optionally verbal responses.

cretization. We build on the π0 VLA (Black et al., 2024), which additionally handles multiple images and continuous state observations qt, and modifies the VLM to output con-tinuous action chunk distributions via flow-matching, but the high-level principles are similar. While such VLA mod-els can follow a wide variety of language prompts (Brohan et al., 2023a), by themselves they are typically limited to simple and atomic commands, and do not handle the com-plex prompts and feedback that we study in this paper. 

# 4. Hi Robot 

We provide an overview of our method in Figure 2. Our approach decomposes the policy p(At|ot) into a low-level and high-level inference process, where the low-level pol-icy consists of a VLA that produces the action chunk At

in response to a simpler, low-level language command, and the high-level policy consists of a VLM that processes the open-ended task prompt, and outputs these low-level lan-guage commands for the low-level inference process. The two processes run at different rates: the low-level process produces action chunks at a high frequency, while the high-level process is invoked less often, either after a set time or upon receiving new language feedback. Thus, the high-level process essentially “talks” to the low-level process, breaking down complex prompts and interactions into bite-sized commands that can be converted into actions. 

4.1. Hierarchical Inference with VLAs 

Formally, the high-level policy phi (ˆℓt|I1 

> t

, ..., Int , ℓ t) takes in the image observations and an open-ended prompt ℓt, and produces an intermediate language command ˆℓt. The low-level policy plo (At|I1 

> t

, ..., Int , ˆℓt, qt) takes in the same type of observation as the standard VLA described in Section 3, except that the language command ℓt is replaced by the output from the high-level policy ˆℓt. Thus, following the System 1/System 2 analogy, the job of the high-level pol-icy is to take in the overall task prompt ℓt and accompa-nying context, in the form of images and user interactions, and translate it into a suitable task for the robot to do at this moment, represented by ˆℓt, that the low-level policy is likely to understand. Of course, for simple and familiar tasks, this is not necessary – if we simply want the robot to perform a task that the low-level policy was directly trained for, we could simply set ˆℓt = ℓt and proceed as in prior work (Brohan et al., 2022). The benefit of this hierarchical inference process is in situations where either the prompt ℓt

is too complex for the low-level policy to parse, too unfa-miliar in the context of the robot data, or involves intricate interactions with the user. The high-level policy is represented by a VLM that uses the images and ℓt as the prefix, and produces ˆℓt as the suffix. We describe how this model is trained in Section 4.3. Since high-level inference is slower but also less sensitive to quick changes in the environment, we can comfortably run it at a lower frequency. A variety of strategies could be used to instantiate this, including intelligent strategies where the system detects when the command ˆℓt has been completed before inferring the next suitable command. In our implementation, we found a very simple strategy to work well: we rerun high-level inference and recompute 

ˆℓt either when one second has elapsed, or when a new in-teraction with the user takes place. This provides reactive behavior when the user provides feedback or corrections, while maintaining simplicity. 

4.2. Incorporating User Interaction 

The user can intervene at any point during policy execution and provide additional information and feedback, or even change the task entirely. In our prototype, these interven-tions take the form of text commands or spoken language (which is then transcribed into text). When the system re-ceives a user intervention, the high-level inference is trig-gered immediately to recompute ˆℓt. The high-level policy has the option to include a verbal utterance ut in the com-mand ˆℓt, which can be confirmations or clarifications from the robot. When ut is included, we use a text to speech system to play the utterance to the user, and remove it from 

ˆℓt before passing it into the low-level policy. When an interjection (“leave it alone”) has been fulfilled, the user can signal to the robot that it may switch back to the previous command and continue the task execution. Notably, the responses of the high-level policy are contex-tual , because it observes not only the prompt ℓt, but also the current image observations. Therefore, it can correctly 4Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models     

> Figure 3: Data collection and generation for training the high-level policy. We first collect teleoperated robot demonstrations and segment them into short skills (e.g., pick up KitKat ). Using this labeled data, we prompt a vision-language model (VLM) to generate synthetic user instructions (e.g., “Can you get me some-thing sweet?” ) and robot responses. The resulting dataset is used to train the high-level policy, which maps image observations and user commands to verbal responses and skill labels.

ground feedback like “that’s not trash,” which is not possi-ble with language-only systems. 

4.3. Data Collection and Training Hi Robot 

To train Hi Robot in a scalable manner, we employ both human-labeled and synthetically generated interaction data, as illustrated in Figure 3. First, we collect robot demonstration data Ddemo via teleoperation. This yields trajectories with coarse language annotations of the over-all goal (e.g., make a sandwich ). We then segment these full demonstration episodes into short skills, ˆℓt, such as 

pick up one piece of lettuce , which generally last between one and three seconds. We also heuristically extract ba-sic movement primitives (e.g., small corrective motions) such as move the right arm to the left from the raw robot actions. The resulting dataset Dlabeled contains a set of 

(ˆℓt, I1 

> t

, ..., Int ) tuples that describe robot skills. Next, we use a large vision-language model (VLM) pgen 

to produce synthetic user prompts and interjections ℓt,and corresponding robot utterance ut. Given Dlabeled , we prompt pgen with both the visual context I1 

> t

, ..., Int and the skill label ˆℓt (e.g., pick up the lettuce ). pgen then imag-ines an appropriate interaction that might have led to ˆℓt in a real user interaction: it generates possible user prompts ℓt

(e.g., “Can you add some lettuce for me?” ) along with the robot’s verbal responses and clarifications ut. We detail the generation of the synethetic dataset Dsyn in Appendix A. We train the high-level policy phi (ˆℓt|I1 

> t

, ..., Int , ℓ t) on 

Dsyn ∪ D labeled using the cross-entropy loss for next-token prediction. To train the low-level policy 

plo (At|I1 

> t

, ..., Int , ˆℓt, qt), we use Dlabeled ∪ D demo using a flow-matching objective, following Black et al. (2024). 

4.4. Model Architecture and Implementation 

In our implementation, the low-level and high-level poli-cies use the same base VLM as a starting point, namely the PaliGemma-3B VLM (Beyer et al., 2024). The low-level policy is the π0 VLA (Black et al., 2024), which is trained by finetuning PaliGemma-3B with an additional flow matching “action expert” to produce continuous ac-tions, while the high-level policy is fine-tuned on the image-language tuples described in Section 4.3 to predict commands. While we employ π0 for our experiments, our framework is inherently modular, allowing for the integra-tion of alternative language-conditioned policies as needed. 

# 5. Experiments 

In our experimental evaluation, we study a range of prob-lems that combine challenging physical interactions with complex user interaction, including multi-stage instruc-tions, live user feedback in the middle of the task, and prompts that describe novel task variations. We compare our full method to prior approaches and to alternative de-signs that use other high-level policy training methods. The aims of our experiments are: 1. Evaluate the ability of our method to follow a variety of complex textual prompts and live user feedback. 2. Compare our full method to prior approaches that train a flat instruction-following VLA policy or that use foun-dation models out-of-the-box for high-level reasoning. 3. Evaluate the importance of synthetic data and hierarchy for task performance and language following. 

5.1. Tasks and Baseline Methods 

We use three complex problem domains in our experi-ments, as shown in Figure 4. 

Table bussing involves cleaning up a table, placing dishes and utensils into a bussing bin and trash items into the trash. The training data consists of full table cleaning episodes. This task is physically challenging because some items re-quire nuanced grasping strategies (e.g., grasping a plate by the edge), the robot must pick up and singulate different objects, and in some cases might even manipulate some objects using others (e.g., picking up a plate with trash on it and tilting the plate to dump the trash into the trash bin). In our evaluation, the robot receives prompts that substan-5Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models  

> Figure 4: Task domains used in our evaluation . Across three domains, we evaluate complex instructions, intermediate feedback, and user interruptions. For example, in Table Bussing, when the user says, “that’s not trash,” the robot correctly puts the bowl back down instead of putting it away. All images are from policy rollouts.

tively alter the goal of the task, such as “can you clean up only the trash, but not dishes?”, “can you clean up only the dishes, but not trash?”, and “bus all the yellowish things”. This requires the high-level model to reason about the task and each object (e.g., recognizing that reusable plastic cups are dishes, while paper cups are trash), then modify the robot’s “default” behavior of always putting away all items. This includes understanding what to do and also what not 

to do (e.g., avoid touching dishes when asked to collect only trash). The robot might also receive contextual feed-back during the task, such as “this is not trash”, “leave the rest”, or “leave it alone,” which require it to understand the 6Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models    

> Figure 5: Comparisons to Prior Methods. Hi Robot outperforms GPT-4o and flat VLA on Table Bussing, Sandwich Making, and Grocery Shopping. Hi Robot averages over 40% higher instruction accuracy than GPT-4o, showing stronger alignment with user prompts and real-time observations, and approaches expert human guidance by leveraging its high-level policy.

interjection and respond accordingly. 

Sandwich making requires the robot to make a sandwich, using up to six ingredients as well as bread. This task is physically difficult, because the robot has to manipulate de-formable and delicate ingredients that have to be grasped carefully and placed precisely. The data contains examples of different types of sandwiches, with segment labels (e.g., “pick up one slice of bread”). We use this task to evalu-ate complex prompts, such as “hi robot, can you make me a sandwich with cheese, roast beef, and lettuce?” or “can you make me a vegetarian sandwich? I’m allergic to pick-les”, and live corrections, like “that’s all, no more”. 

Grocery shopping entails picking up a combination of re-quested items from a grocery shelf, placing them into a bas-ket, and placing the basket on a nearby table. This task requires controlling a bimanual mobile manipulator (see Figure 4) and interpreting nuanced semantics that involve variable numbers of objects. Examples of prompts include “hey robot, can you get me some chips? I’m preparing for a movie night”, “can you get me something sweet?”, “can you grab me something to drink?”, “hey robot, can you get me some Twix and Skittles?”, as well as interjections such as “I also want some Kitkat”. 

Comparisons and ablations. Our comparisons evaluate our full method and a number of alternative approaches, which either employ a different type of high-level strategy, or do not utilize a hierarchical structure. These include: 

Expert human high level : This oracle baseline uses an expert human in place of the high-level model, who manu-ally enters language commands for low-level behaviors that they believe are most likely to succeed at the task. This al-lows us to understand how much performance is limited by the low-level policy, with ideal high-level commands. 

GPT-4o high-level model : This method uses the same high-level/low-level decomposition as Hi Robot, but queries the GPT-4o API-based model for the high level, while using the same low-level policy. GPT-4o is a sig-nificantly larger VLM than the one we use, but it is not finetuned with our real and synthetic datasets. This com-parison is similar to an advanced version of SayCan (Bro-han et al., 2023b), which uses an out-of-the-box LLM as a high-level policy, while this baseline uses a VLM. To align GPT-4o with the robot’s affordances, we carefully en-gineer the prompt to include task-relevant instructions that the low-level policy can follow, determined by ranking the most common skill labels in the human-annotated dataset, and ask GPT-4o to choose among them. 

Flat VLA : This comparison directly uses the same π0 low-level policy as in Hi Robot, but without any high level or synthetic data, representing a state-of-the-art approach for instruction following (Black et al., 2024). 

Flat VLA with synthetic data : This ablation uses the 

π0 low-level policy by itself, without a high-level model, but includes the synthetic data in the training data for the low-level policy, such that it can still process the complex prompts used in our evaluation. This baseline allows us to evaluate the benefit of hierarchy independent from the ef-fect of synthetic data. 

Hi Robot without synthetic data : This ablation corre-sponds to our method without synthetic training data, eval-uating the importance of including diverse synthetically-generated prompts in training. This ablation can be seen as an advanced VLM-based version of YAY Robot (Shi et al., 2024), a prior system that uses a high-level model to predict language commands for a low-level model. 

5.2. Metrics and Evaluation Protocol 

We report two complementary metrics, measured by a hu-man evaluator who is blind to the method being run. Each evaluation consists of 20 trials per task per method. 

Instruction Accuracy (IA). This score measures how well the high-level policy’s predicted instruction aligns with hu-man intent, requiring multi-modal understanding of the current environment and prompt. If the prediction from the high-level model is consistent with both the user’s com-mand and the current observation, the evaluator marks it 7Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models   

> Figure 6: Qualitative Command Comparisons. GPT-4o often (a) misidentifies objects, (b) skips subtasks, or (c) ignores user intent. Hi Robot consistently produces commands aligned with the robot’s ongoing actions and user requests. Without synthetic data, the high-level policy aligns well with image observations but ignores user constraints.

as a correct prediction; otherwise, it is labeled as incorrect. The Instruction Accuracy for a trial is then computed as the proportion of correct predictions out of the total number of predictions. For flat baselines, which lack interpretable language predictions, scoring is based on the evaluator’s interpretation of the intent of the policy behavior. 

Task Progress (TP). Since all tasks we evaluate are com-plex and long-horizon, we record task progress to provide a granular view of task completion. Task progress quanti-fies how closely the robot matches the intended goal and is computed by the proportion of objects that are successfully placed in their correct locations or configurations. 

5.3. Core Results 

We present results for our system and two key baselines: a GPT-4o policy and a flat VLA method. Quantitative and qualitative results are in Figure 5 and Figure 6, and we sum-marize our findings below. 

(1) Hi Robot excels at open-ended instruction following. 

Across all tasks, Hi Robot exhibits substantially higher In-struction Accuracy and Task Progress, compared to GPT-4o and the flat baseline. It properly identifies, picks up, and places the correct items – even when prompted to handle only certain objects or omit ingredients (e.g., “I’m aller-gic to pickles”). In contrast, GPT-4o frequently loses con-text once physical interaction begins, issuing nonsensical commands (e.g., “pick up bermuda triangle”) or sometimes labeling everything as “plate” or “spoon,” which disrupts long-horizon planning. 

(2) Hi Robot shows strong situated reasoning and adap-tation to feedback. When users modify requests mid-task (e.g., “leave the rest,” “I also want a KitKat”), Hi Robot up-dates low-level commands accordingly. GPT-4o, however, often fails to maintain a coherent internal state, leading to commands like picking up new objects when the gripper is still occupied or prematurely switching tasks. The flat base-line, on the other hand, does not react to real-time feedback. 

(3) Hi Robot is effective across diverse tasks, robots, and user constraints. On single-arm, dual-arm, and mo-bile bimanual platforms, Hi Robot is able to handle dis-tinct objects (from fragile cheese slices to tall bottles) while respecting dynamic constraints (e.g., “bus only yellowish items,” “don’t add tomatoes”). By contrast, the flat baseline and GPT-4o often revert to default behaviors (e.g., picking up every object in sight, or including almost all ingredients in a sandwich) when the prompt changes mid-episode. 

(4) Expert human guidance reveals the low-level pol-icy’s strengths but underscores the need for high-level reasoning. With human high-level instructions, the low-level policy executes nearly flawlessly, showing that fail-ures stem more from reasoning than actuation. However, solely relying on human input is not scalable. Hi Robot bridges this gap via a high-level VLM that aligns with user prompts and real-time observations, whereas GPT-4o’s lack of physical grounding and the flat baseline’s lack of high-level reasoning hinder performance. 

5.4. Ablation Studies 

We conduct two key ablations to isolate the contributions of (1) synthetic data for high-level reasoning, and (2) hier-archical decomposition vs. a single “flat” policy. 

(A) Synthetic data is critical for open-ended instruction following. Comparing Hi Robot (trained on human-labeled + synthetic data) to a variant trained solely on human-labeled data shows that synthetic interactions significantly boost language flexibility (Figure 7). Without them, the ab-8Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models      

> Figure 7: Ablation on synthetic data. Synthetic data is essential for handling open-ended instructions, as the model trained with-out it struggle with user-driven deviations, failing to integrate clar-ifications and constraints, whereas Hi Robot adapts seamlessly by leveraging diverse, compositional language prompts. (IA = In-struction Accuracy, TP = Task Progress)
> Figure 8: Hierarchical policy vs. flat policy. The hierarchical approach outperforms the flat variant trained on the same data, as it effectively integrates user feedback and partial instructions, whereas the flat model struggles with mid-task clarifications and nuanced task variations. (IA = Instruction Accuracy, TP = Task Progress)

lated model ignores clarifications (e.g., “this is not trash”) or includes forbidden items (e.g., pickles), while Hi Robot smoothly adapts to such feedback, due to the broader cov-erage of compositional language in synthetic data. 

(B) Hierarchical structure outperforms a flat policy. We next compare Hi Robot to a flat policy trained on the same synthetic data but without a separate reasoning step (Fig-ure 8). The flat model often reverts to clearing all items or fails to handle partial instructions (“bus only the yellowish things”), whereas Hi Robot re-checks the prompt at each high-level step and responds coherently to mid-task up-dates. This suggests separating high-level reasoning from low-level control is benficial for multi-step coherence and adapting to dynamic user inputs. 

# 6. Discussion and Future Work 

We presented Hi Robot, a system that uses vision-language models (VLMs) in a hierarchical structure, first reasoning over complex prompts, user feedback, and language inter-action to deduce the most appropriate next step to fulfill the task, and then performing that step by directly outputting low-level action commands. Our system can be thought of as a VLM-based instantiation of the “System 1” and “Sys-tem 2” architecture (Kahneman, 2011). The deliberative “System 2” layer takes the form of a high-level VLM pol-icy, which leverages semantic and visual knowledge from web-scale pre-training to reason through complex prompts and user interactions. The physical, reactive “System 1” layer also takes the form of a VLM, trained to directly out-put robot actions in response to simpler commands that de-scribe atomic behaviors. The two VLMs have nearly identical architectures, with the only difference being that the low-level policy uses flow matching to output the actions. Indeed, the separation of roles at the model level is not fundamental to this design: a natural step for future work is to combine both systems into one model, and draw the “System 1” vs “System 2” dis-tinction purely at inference time. Future work could also interleave high-level and low-level processing more intri-cately – while our system simply runs high-level inference at a fixed but lower frequency, an adaptive system might si-multaneously process inputs and language asynchronously at multiple different levels of abstraction, providing for a more flexible multi-level reasoning procedure. Our system also has a number of limitations that could be studied in future work. While we show that our high-level policy can often break down complex commands into low-level steps that the robot can perform physically, the train-ing process for this high level model relies in some amount of prompt engineering to produce synthetic training exam-ples that induce this behavior. The training process decou-ples the high-level and low-level models, and they are not aware of one another’s capabilities except through the train-ing examples. Coupling these two layers more directly, e.g. by allowing the high-level policy to be more aware of how successfully the low-level policy completes each com-mand, would be an exciting direction for future work. More generally, by instantiating both high-level and low-level reasoning via VLMs, we believe that this design opens the door for much more intricate integration of these compo-nents, such that future work might create robotic vision-language-action models that dynamically reason about in-puts, feedback, and even their own capabilities to produce suitable situated response in complex open-world settings. 9Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models 

# Acknowledgments 

We thank Ury Zhilinsky and Kevin Black for their help in setting up the data and training infrastructure. We thank Karol Hausman for valuable feedback and discussions on video demonstration and language-following evaluation. We are also grateful to Noah Brown, Szymon Jakubczak, Adnan Esmail, Tim Jones, Mohith Mothukuri, and Devin LeBlanc for their support in robot maintenance. We appre-ciate Suraj Nair and Laura Smith for their insightful dis-cussions that helped with policy debugging. We also thank Claudio Guglieri for help in creating visualizations used in this paper and on the project website. Finally, we extend our deepest gratitude to the entire team of robot operators at Physical Intelligence for their immense contributions to data collection, annotation, and policy evaluations. 

# Impact Statement 

This paper presents work where the goal is to advance the fields of machine learning and robotics. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none of which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

# References 

Belkhale, S., Ding, T., Xiao, T., Sermanet, P., Vuong, Q., Tompson, J., Chebotar, Y., Dwibedi, D., and Sadigh, D. Rt-h: Action hierarchies using language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01823 , 2024. Beyer, L., Steiner, A., Pinto, A. S., Kolesnikov, A., Wang, X., Salz, D., Neumann, M., Alabdulmohsin, I., Tschan-nen, M., Bugliarello, E., et al. Paligemma: A versatile 3b vlm for transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07726 ,2024. Black, K., Brown, N., Driess, D., Esmail, A., Equi, M., Finn, C., Fusai, N., Groom, L., Hausman, K., Ichter, B., et al. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 ,2024. Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Dabis, J., Finn, C., Gopalakrishnan, K., Hausman, K., Herzog, A., Hsu, J., et al. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 , 2022. Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Chen, X., Choromanski, K., Ding, T., Driess, D., Dubey, A., Finn, C., et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models trans-fer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818 , 2023a. Brohan, A., Chebotar, Y., Finn, C., Hausman, K., Herzog, A., Ho, D., Ibarz, J., Irpan, A., Jang, E., Julian, R., et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In Conference on robot learning , pp. 287– 318. PMLR, 2023b. Chen, H., Yao, Y., Liu, R., Liu, C., and Ichnowski, J. Automating robot failure recovery using vision-language models with optimized prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.03966 , 2024. Chi, C., Feng, S., Du, Y., Xu, Z., Cousineau, E., Burch-fiel, B., and Song, S. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2023. Dai, Y., Lee, J., Fazeli, N., and Chai, J. Racer: Rich language-guided failure recovery policies for imitation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.14674 , 2024. Driess, D., Xia, F., Sajjadi, M. S., Lynch, C., Chowdhery, A., Ichter, B., Wahid, A., Tompson, J., Vuong, Q., Yu, T., et al. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language model. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378 , 2023. Fu, Z., Zhao, T. Z., and Finn, C. Mobile aloha: Learning bi-manual mobile manipulation with low-cost whole-body teleoperation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02117 , 2024. Hu, Y., Lin, F., Zhang, T., Yi, L., and Gao, Y. Look before you leap: Unveiling the power of gpt-4v in robotic vision-language planning, 2023. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2311.17842 .Huang, W., Abbeel, P., Pathak, D., and Mordatch, I. Lan-guage models as zero-shot planners: Extracting action-able knowledge for embodied agents. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022. Huang, W., Wang, C., Zhang, R., Li, Y., Wu, J., and Fei-Fei, L. Voxposer: Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05973 , 2023. Jang, E., Irpan, A., Khansari, M., Kappler, D., Ebert, F., Lynch, C., Levine, S., and Finn, C. Bc-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In 

Conference on Robot Learning , pp. 991–1002. PMLR, 2022. Kahneman, D. Thinking, fast and slow . Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York, 2011. ISBN 9780374275631 0374275637. Kim, M. J., Pertsch, K., Karamcheti, S., Xiao, T., Balakr-ishna, A., Nair, S., Rafailov, R., Foster, E., Lam, G., San-keti, P., et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. 10 Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models 

Li, B., Wu, P., Abbeel, P., and Malik, J. Interactive task planning with language models, 2025a. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2310.10645 .Li, Q., Liang, Y., Wang, Z., Luo, L., Chen, X., Liao, M., Wei, F., Deng, Y., Xu, S., Zhang, Y., et al. Cogact: A foundational vision-language-action model for synergiz-ing cognition and action in robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19650 , 2024. Li, Y., Deng, Y., Zhang, J., Jang, J., Memmel, M., Yu, R., Garrett, C. R., Ramos, F., Fox, D., Li, A., Gupta, A., and Goyal, A. Hamster: Hierarchical action models for open-world robot manipulation, 2025b. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2502.05485 .Liang, J., Huang, W., Xia, F., Xu, P., Hausman, K., Ichter, B., Florence, P., and Zeng, A. Code as policies: Lan-guage model programs for embodied control. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-tomation (ICRA) , pp. 9493–9500. IEEE, 2023. Liu, F., Fang, K., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Moka: Open-vocabulary robotic manipulation through mark-based vi-sual prompting. In First Workshop on Vision-Language Models for Navigation and Manipulation at ICRA 2024 ,2024a. Liu, H., Chen, A., Zhu, Y., Swaminathan, A., Kolobov, A., and Cheng, C.-A. Interactive robot learning from verbal correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17555 , 2023. Liu, P., Orru, Y., Vakil, J., Paxton, C., Shafiullah, N. M. M., and Pinto, L. Ok-robot: What really matters in integrat-ing open-knowledge models for robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12202 , 2024b. Liu, S., Wu, L., Li, B., Tan, H., Chen, H., Wang, Z., Xu, K., Su, H., and Zhu, J. Rdt-1b: a diffusion founda-tion model for bimanual manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07864 , 2024c. Loshchilov, I. and Hutter, F. Decoupled weight decay reg-ularization, 2017. Matuszek, C., Herbst, E., Zettlemoyer, L., and Fox, D. Learning to parse natural language commands to a robot control system. In Experimental Robotics: The 13th In-ternational Symposium on Experimental Robotics , vol-ume 88, pp. 403. Springer, 2013. McCallum, S., Taylor-Davies, M., Albrecht, S., and Suglia, A. Is feedback all you need? leveraging natural language feedback in goal-conditioned rl. In NeurIPS 2023 Work-shop on Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning .Namasivayam, K., Singh, H., Bindal, V., Tuli, A., Agrawal, V., Jain, R., Singla, P., and Paul, R. Learning neuro-symbolic programs for language guided robot manip-ulation. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 7973–7980. IEEE, 2023. Nasiriany, S., Xia, F., Yu, W., Xiao, T., Liang, J., Dasgupta, I., Xie, A., Driess, D., Wahid, A., Xu, Z., et al. Pivot: Iterative visual prompting elicits actionable knowledge for vlms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07872 , 2024. Octo Model Team, Ghosh, D., Walke, H., Pertsch, K., Black, K., Mees, O., Dasari, S., Hejna, J., Xu, C., Luo, J., Kreiman, T., Tan, Y., Chen, L. Y., Sanketi, P., Vuong, Q., Xiao, T., Sadigh, D., Finn, C., and Levine, S. Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , Delft, Netherlands, 2024. O’Neill, A., Rehman, A., Maddukuri, A., Gupta, A., Padalkar, A., Lee, A., Pooley, A., Gupta, A., Mandlekar, A., Jain, A., et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learn-ing datasets and rt-x models: Open x-embodiment col-laboration 0. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 6892–6903. IEEE, 2024. Patki, S., Daniele, A. F., Walter, M. R., and Howard, T. M. Inferring compact representations for efficient natural language understanding of robot instructions. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 6926–6933. IEEE, 2019. Pertsch, K., Stachowicz, K., Ichter, B., Driess, D., Nair, S., Vuong, Q., Mees, O., Finn, C., and Levine, S. Fast: Efficient action tokenization for vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09747 , 2025. Qiu, D., Ma, W., Pan, Z., Xiong, H., and Liang, J. Open-vocabulary mobile manipulation in unseen dynamic en-vironments with 3d semantic maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18115 , 2024. Radford, A., Kim, J. W., Xu, T., Brockman, G., McLeavey, C., and Sutskever, I. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In International confer-ence on machine learning , pp. 28492–28518. PMLR, 2023. Shah, R., Yu, A., Zhu, Y., Zhu, Y., and Mart´ ın-Mart´ ın, R. Bumble: Unifying reasoning and acting with vision-language models for building-wide mobile manipula-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06237 , 2024. Shi, L. X., Hu, Z., Zhao, T. Z., Sharma, A., Pertsch, K., Luo, J., Levine, S., and Finn, C. Yell at your robot: 11 Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models 

Improving on-the-fly from language corrections. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12910 , 2024. Singh, I., Blukis, V., Mousavian, A., Goyal, A., Xu, D., Tremblay, J., Fox, D., Thomason, J., and Garg, A. Prog-prompt: Generating situated robot task plans using large language models. In 2023 IEEE International Confer-ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 11523– 11530. IEEE, 2023. Singh, U., Bhattacharyya, P., and Namboodiri, V. P. Lgr2: Language guided reward relabeling for accelerat-ing hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05881 , 2024. Stephan, M., Khazatsky, A., Mitchell, E., Chen, A. S., Hsu, S., Sharma, A., and Finn, C. Rlvf: Learning from ver-bal feedback without overgeneralization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10893 , 2024. Stepputtis, S., Campbell, J., Phielipp, M., Lee, S., Baral, C., and Ben Amor, H. Language-conditioned imitation learning for robot manipulation tasks. Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 33:13139–13150, 2020. Stone, A., Xiao, T., Lu, Y., Gopalakrishnan, K., Lee, K.-H., Vuong, Q., Wohlhart, P., Kirmani, S., Zitkovich, B., Xia, F., et al. Open-world object manipulation us-ing pre-trained vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00905 , 2023. Swadzba, A., Vorwerg, C., Wachsmuth, S., and Rickheit, G. A computational model for the alignment of hierar-chical scene representations in human-robot interaction. In Twenty-First International Joint Conference on Artifi-cial Intelligence . Citeseer, 2009. Wang, S., Han, M., Jiao, Z., Zhang, Z., Wu, Y. N., Zhu, S.-C., and Liu, H. Llmˆ 3: Large language model-based task and motion planning with motion failure reasoning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11552 , 2024. Wen, J., Zhu, Y., Li, J., Zhu, M., Wu, K., Xu, Z., Liu, N., Cheng, R., Shen, C., Peng, Y., et al. Tinyvla: Towards fast, data-efficient vision-language-action models for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12514 ,2024. Xiao, A., Janaka, N., Hu, T., Gupta, A., Li, K., Yu, C., and Hsu, D. Robi butler: Remote multimodal inter-actions with household robot assistant. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.20548 , 2024. Zawalski, M., Chen, W., Pertsch, K., Mees, O., Finn, C., and Levine, S. Robotic control via embodied chain-of-thought reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08693 ,2024. Zhao, T. Z., Kumar, V., Levine, S., and Finn, C. Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with low-cost hard-ware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705 , 2023. Zheng, J., Li, J., Liu, D., Zheng, Y., Wang, Z., Ou, Z., Liu, Y., Liu, J., Zhang, Y.-Q., and Zhan, X. Universal ac-tions for enhanced embodied foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10105 , 2025. Zhi, P., Zhang, Z., Han, M., Zhang, Z., Li, Z., Jiao, Z., Jia, B., and Huang, S. Closed-loop open-vocabulary mobile manipulation with gpt-4v. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10220 , 2024. 12 Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models 

# A. Synthetic Data Generation 

A.1. Scenario and Response Categorization 

To ensure the quality and diversity of the synthetic data, we incorporate structured scenario classification and re-sponse categorization into the prompt design for pgen , fol-lowing (Stephan et al., 2024). Specifically, we classify interactions into different scenario types, such as nega-tive task (where the user instructs the robot what not to do), situated correction (where the user adjusts an earlier command based on the evolving task state), and specific constraint (where the user specifies particular constraints, such as dietary preferences). In addition, we categorize the robot’s responses into types such as simple confirma-tions , clarifications , and error handling . These classifica-tions guide the generation process to ensure a broad range of user-robot interactions. 

A.2. Prompt Construction for Contextual Grounding 

In prompt P, we include a detailed description of the task (e.g., bussing a table, making a sandwich, grocery shop-ping) and instruct the model to ground responses in visual observations and prior context. A key advantage of lever-aging large pretrained VLMs is their ability to incorporate world knowledge when generating interactions. For in-stance, the model can infer dietary constraints when gener-ating prompts for sandwich-making, producing user com-mands such as “Can you make a sandwich for me? I’m lactose intolerant” and an appropriate robot response like “Sure, I won’t put cheese on it.” Similarly, it can reason over ambiguous or implicit requests, such as inferring that “I want something sweet” in a grocery shopping scenario should lead to suggestions like chocolate or candy. To maintain consistency in multi-step tasks, we condition 

pgen on prior skill labels within an episode ˆℓ0, ..., ˆℓt−1,allowing it to generate coherent user commands that account for past actions. For instance, if the robot has already placed lettuce and tomato on a sandwich, the generated user prompt might request additional in-gredients that logically follow. This ensures that the synthetic interactions reflect realistic task progression rather than isolated commands. As such, we leverage 

pgen (ℓt, u t|I1 

> t

, ..., Int , ˆℓ0, ..., ˆℓt−1, ˆℓt, P) to produce a richer, more diverse synthetic dataset Dsyn that provides mean-ingful supervision for training our high-level policy. While in this work we generate a separate Dsyn and train a separate high-level policy for each task (e.g., sandwich making vs. table cleaning) for clarity and ease of bench-marking, the architecture is readily amenable to a unified multi-task formulation. In principle, the same hierarchical approach could be used to train a single high-level policy across a multitude of tasks, facilitating knowledge transfer between task domains and more robust, open-ended robot behavior. 

# B. System and Robot Overview 

Our system integrates speech-based interactions and real-time robotic control. Below, we detail the components of our system, including audio processing, GPU-based infer-ence, and the robot configurations. 

B.1. Perception and Language Processing 

For speech-based interaction, we use a consumer-grade lavalier microphone for audio input. Speech-to-text tran-scription is handled locally using Whisper large-v2 (Rad-ford et al., 2023). For text-to-speech synthesis, we employ the Cartetia API to generate natural and expressive speech outputs. 

B.2. Inference Hardware 

To support real-time inference, we utilize one to two NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 consumer-grade GPUs. 

B.3. Real-Time Inference Latency 

We measured latency across components on consumer-grade RTX 4090. 

Low-Level Policy Per-Step Inference Times Component Time (ms) 

Image encoding 14 Observation processing 32 Action prediction (x10) 27 Total (on-board) 73 Total (off-board + WiFi) 86 

High-Level Policy (Single Decoding Step) 

• RTX 4090 : 47 ms (prefill) + 13.2 ms (decode) • H100 : 17.3 ms (prefill) + 5.7 ms (decode) These measurements confirm real-time feasibility at 

∼10 Hz control rates. With action chunking (Zhao et al., 2023), we can use it to control robots at 50 Hz. 

B.4. Robot System Details 

We employ three different robot configurations with vari-ous manipulation and mobility capabilities. 

UR5e. This setup features a 6-DoF robotic arm equipped with a parallel jaw gripper. It includes two cameras: awrist-mounted camera and an over-the-shoulder camera. The system operates within a 7-dimensional configuration and action space. 13 Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models 

Bimanual ARX. This configuration consists of two 6-DoF ARX arms. The system is equipped with three cam-eras: two wrist-mounted cameras and one base camera. The combined system has a 14-dimensional configuration and action space, enabling dextrous bimanual manipulation tasks. 

Mobile ARX. Built on the Mobile ALOHA (Fu et al., 2024) platform, this system integrates two 6-DoF ARX robotic arms mounted on a mobile base. The nonholo-nomic base introduces two additional action dimensions, resulting in a 14-dimensional configuration space and a 16-dimensional action space. Similar to the bimanual setup, it includes two wrist-mounted cameras and a base camera, providing robust visual feedback for navigation and manip-ulation. 

# C. Model and Experiment Details 

C.1. Model Initialization 

While our method can be trained from scratch or fine-tuned from any vision-language model (VLM) backbone, in prac-tice we use PaliGemma (Beyer et al., 2024) as the base model. PaliGemma is an open-source, 3-billion-parameter VLM that offers a good balance between performance and computational efficiency. We unfreeze the full model for fine-tuning. 

C.2. Optimizer and Hyperparameters 

We use the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with β1 = 0 .9, β2 = 0 .95 , and no weight decay. Gradient norms are clipped to a maximum magnitude of 1. We main-tain an exponential moving average (EMA) of the network weights with a decay factor of 0.999. The learning rate is warmed up over the first 1,000 steps and then held constant at 1 × 10 −5. We use a batch size of 512. 

C.3. Training Duration and Resources 

Training the high-level policy is highly efficient, requiring approximately 2 hours on 8 ×H100 GPUs. The low-level policy follows a similar training pipeline, though training time may vary depending on the dataset size and the com-plexity of the target tasks for action prediction. 

C.4. Failure Cases 

We observed the following failure modes: 1. High-level :• Difficulty with instructions requiring long-context reasoning, since the current system lacks memory 2. Low-level :• Temporarily ignoring instructions: e.g., grabbing cheese when the robot is close to it despite user’s lactose intolerance (due to training bias toward proximal objects) • Error accumulation and out-of-distribution (OOD) recovery: e.g., dropped objects Beyond the future directions discussed in the main text, several additional mitigations may help address observed limitations, including but not limited to: • Stronger instruction-following model • Long-context model • Adversarial data generation for edge cases • Diverse data collection including failure recovery and annotation 

C.5. System Prompt for GPT-4o 

In the system prompt for GPT-4o, we include a description of the task, robot setup, and common instructions to select from. Below is an example for the Table Cleaning task.                                                                                                                                             

> Listing 1: GPT-4o Baseline Prompt
> You are an AI assistant guiding asingle-arm robot to bus tables. The robot can optionally place trash in the trash bin and utensils and dishes in the plastic box. Every 2seconds, you can issue one instruction from aprovided list. You will receive images from two cameras: one for aglobal view and one on the robot’ wrist for detailed views. Interpret the user’s instruction into one from the provided list for the robot to execute. Adhere strictly to the user’s instruction. If ambiguous, reason out the best action for the robot. Only provide the exact instruction from the list without explanation. You will select your instruction from the following list: put food container in trash bin pick up chopstick drop wrapper in trash pick up plastic plate pick up the cup pick up white bowl place bowl to box pick up spoon place trash to trash bin drop box in trash place take out box to trash move to the left pick up container drop plate in bin pick up the trash

14 Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models 

pick up plastic bowl go higher place spoon to box pick up the paper container drop fork in bin pick up the bowl pick up the plastic container go lower pick up box move to the right drop plastic lid into recycling bin pick up wrapper pick up the plate put bowl in box pick up the container put the plate in the bin pick up cup put cup into box throw it in the trash pick up food container pick up blue cup drop the bowl into the bin move towards me pick up napkin rotate counterclockwise put the cup in the bin throw trash away rotate clockwise drop plastic bowl into box open gripper pick up plastic cup pick up the plate close gripper move away from me go back to home position 

15