Title: General agents need world models

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=dlIoumNiXt

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# General agents need world models 

Jonathan Richens 1 Tom Everitt 1 David Abel 1

# Abstract 

Are world models a necessary ingredient for flex-ible, goal-directed behaviour, or is model-free learning sufficient? We provide a formal answer to this question, showing that any agent capable of generalizing to multi-step goal-directed tasks must have learned a predictive model of its en-vironment. We show that this model can be ex-tracted from the agent’s policy, and that increasing the agents performance or the complexity of the goals it can achieve requires learning increasingly accurate world models. This has a number of consequences: from developing safe and general agents, to bounding agent capabilities in complex environments, and providing new algorithms for eliciting world models from agents. 

# 1. Introduction 

A hallmark of human intelligence is the ability to perform novel tasks with minimal supervision, formalised by few-shot and zero-shot learning (Lake et al., 2017). With the emergence of these capabilities in language models (Brown et al., 2020), focus has shifted to developing general agents— systems capable of performing long horizon goal-oriented tasks in complex, real-world environments (Yao et al., 2022; Hao et al., 2023). In humans this kind of flexible goal-directed behaviour relies heavily on rich mental representa-tions of the world, i.e. world models (Johnson-Laird, 1983; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018), which are used to set abstract goals beyond immediate sensory inputs (Locke & Latham, 2013), and to deliberatively and proactively plan actions (Bratman, 1987). Whether world models are necessary for achieving human-level AI has long been debated, pitting the challenges of learning models against the potential benefits they confer (Huang, 2020). Explicitly model-based agents have achieved impressive performance across many tasks and domains (Hafner et al.,    

> 1Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Jonathan Richens
> <jonrichens@google.com >.
> Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Our result complements previous insights from planning and inverse RL. While planning uses a world model and a goal to determine a policy, and IRL and in-verse planning use an agent’s policy and a world model to identify its goal, our result uses an agent’s policy and its goal to identify a world model 2023; Wang et al., 2023; LeCun, 2022; Raad et al., 2024), and having direct access to the agent’s world model has benefits like being able to apply formal planning methods (Sutton, 2018), predicting the agent’s behaviour in safety-critical domains (Amodei et al., 2016; Dalrymple et al., 2024), reducing sample complexity (Hafner et al., 2019) and supporting transfer learning (Chua et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2023). However, learning accurate models of real-world systems can be extremely challenging (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019), and the performance of model-based agents is fundamentally limited by their model’s fidelity. In “Intelligence without representation”, Brooks famously proposed that the world is its own best model , and that all intelligent behaviours can emerge in model-free agents in-teracting through action-perception loops, without needing to learn explicit representations of the world (Brooks, 1991). This view has largely been borne out by the development of model-free agents capable of generalizing across a wide range of tasks and environments (Reed et al., 2022; Brohan et al., 2023; Driess et al., 2023; Black et al., 2024; Schrit-twieser et al., 2020). This model-free paradigm aims to achieve truly general agents while side-stepping the chal-lenges inherent in learning a world model. However, there is mounting evidence that model-free agents may in fact learn implicit world models (Li et al., 2022), and may even 1General agents need world models 

learn implicit planning algorithms (Hou et al., 2023; Bush et al., 2025). This raises a fundamental question: is there a model-free shortcut to human-level AI? Or is learning a world model necessary, with all the complexity this entails? And if so, just how accurate and comprehensive do world models need to be to support a given level of capability? We provide a formal answer to these questions, showing that, 

any agent that satisfies a regret bound for a suf-ficiently diverse set of simple goal-directed tasks must have learned an accurate predictive model of its environment. 

Specifically, we consider environments described by a fully observed Markov processes, and propose a minimalist def-inition of general agents as goal-conditioned policies (Liu et al., 2022) that satisfy a regret bound for a large set of simple goal-directed tasks (such as steering the environment into a desired state). We derive an algorithm that returns an approximation of the environment transition function (a world model) given the policy of any such agent, and show that the error in this approximation decreases as we increase the agent’s performance or the complexity of the goals it can achieve. In other words, general agents are world models, with all the information required to simulate the environ-ment encoded in their policy. Importantly, we prove this for any agent that satisfies a regret bound, regardless of the details of its training and architecture and without imposing rationality assumptions. The necessity of learning a world model has profound con-sequences for how we develop general AI systems, how capable these systems can ultimately be, and how we can ensure agents are safe and interpretable. We explore these consequences and others in Section 4. A more immediate consequence is that in proving our result we derive new algorithms for extracting world models from general agents. We demonstrate this in Section 3.1, and show that our algo-rithms can recover accurate world models even when the agent strongly violates our competence assumptions. In Section 5 we then discuss related work, including inverse reinforcement learning and mechanistic interpretability. 

# 2. Setup 

2.1. Notation 

Capital letters denote random variables X and lower case letters x denoting a value or state X = x. Bold letters denote sets of variables X = {X1, X 2, . . . , X m} and x

denotes the joint state {x1, x 2, . . . , x m}. Square brackets denote a proposition, e.g. [X = x] is True if X = x and False otherwise. 

2.2. Environment 

We assume the environment is a controlled Markov pro-cess (cMP) (Puterman, 2014; Sutton, 2018), which is a Markov decision process without a specified reward func-tion or discount factor. Formally, a cMP consists of a set of states S, a set of actions A, and a transition function 

Pss ′ (a) = P (S = s′ | A = a, S = s). We refer to a sequence of state–action pairs over time as a trajectory ,

τ = ( s0, a 0, s 1, a 1, . . . ) and a finite prefix of τ as a history ,

ht = ( s0, a 0, . . . , s t).

Definition 1 (Controlled Markov process) . A controlled Markov process (cMP) is a Markov decision process (MDP) without a specified reward function or discount factor. It is defined by the tuple (S, A, P ss ′ (a)) where S is the state space, A is the action space, and Pss ′ (a) = P (S = s′ |

A = a, S = s) is the transition function. 

To derive our results we make the standard assumptions that the environment is finite, irreducible, and stationary, mean-ing every state is reachable from every other state under some finite sequence of actions, and transition probabilities do not change over time. Furthermore we assume |A| ≥ 2

so that the environment can support non-trivial policies. 

Assumption 1. We assume the environment is described by an irreducible, stationary, finite, controlled Markov process (Def. 1) with at least two actions. 

For further discussion of these standard assumptions see Puterman, 2014; Sutton, 2018. 

2.3. Goals 

Our aim is not to provide a complete definition of goal-directed behaviour, but to define a simple and intuitive class of goals we might reasonably expect an agent to be capa-ble of. In many settings including planning (Ghallab et al., 2004), goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (Liu et al., 2022), and control theory ( ˚Astr ¨om & Murray, 2021)), the simplest goals are desirable states of the world (goal states), and a goal is achieved by the agent steering the environ-ment into one of these goal states. More generally, goal-directed behaviour can involve a sequence of sub-goals to be achieved in a particular order, and may include desirable actions as well as environment states. This class includes instruction following, which is the type of goal-directed behaviour we typically desire of AI agents. To describe these sequences of sub-goals (sequential goals) we use Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) (Pnueli, 1977; Baier & Katoen, 2008), which is commonly used to specify tasks and temporal objectives for agents (Littman et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Hasanbeig et al., 2019; Dzifcak et al., 2009; Ding et al., 2014) including more recently for goal-conditioned reinforcement learning agents (Vaezipoor et al., 2021; Qiu 2General agents need world models 

et al., 2023; Jackermeier & Abate, 2024). An LTL expres-sion φ assigns a truth value to each trajectory (denoted 

τ |= φ), which is true iff τ satisfies the LTL expression. Concretely, we define a goal as pair (O, g) where g is a set of goal states and O is a temporal operator specifying a time horizon within which the goal states should be reached. For our results it will be sufficient to restrict our attention to two temporal operators; Eventually (♢), where the goal state must be reached at any future time, and Next (⃝),where the next state must be a goal state, e.g. to capture the immediate consequences of an agent’s actions. In the absence of a temporal operator, the goal condition must in the current time step, which we refer to as Now and rep-resent with the trivial (True) operator ⊤. We denote goals as φ := O([( s, a ) ∈ g]) . For example, φ = ♢([ S = s]) 

specifies that state s must eventually be reached. See Ap-pendix A.3 for further discussion. 

Definition 2 (Goals) . A goal φ is an LTL expression of the form φ = O([( s, a ) ∈ g]) where, 

• g is a set of goal-states, a sub-set of the joint states of the environment-agent system (s, a ) ∈ S × A,

• O is a temporal operator specifying the time horizon for reaching g. We restrict to O ∈ {⃝ , ♢, ⊤} where 

⃝ = Next, ♢ = Eventually, ⊤ = Now. 

Using Def. 2 we can construct composite goals of increasing complexity by either combining goals in sequence (where goal φA must be achieved before goal φB ) or in parallel (where satisfying either goal φA or goal φB is sufficient). We use ψ = ⟨φ1, . . . , φ n⟩ to denote a sequence of sub-goals, where the agent must satisfy φ1 before moving on to φ2, and so on. Here ψ is also an LTL expression, which we provide a formula for in Appendix A.3. We refer to n as the depth 

of ψ, i.e. the number of sub-goals the agent must satisfy to satisfy ψ (also known as the temporal height, Demri & Schnoebelen (2002)). Parallel composition is achieved by taking the disjunction (OR) of two or more (sequential) goals, i.e. for ψ′ = ψ1 ∨ ψ2, τ |= ψ′ is true iff ψ1 or ψ2 are satisfied by τ . Finally, Ψ denotes the set of all composite goals for a given environment, and Ψn to denote the set of all compositions of goals (Def. 3) of depth at most n.

Definition 3 (Composite goals) . A sequential goal ψ is an ordered sequence of sub-goals (Def. 2) ψ = ⟨φ1, . . . φ n⟩,where the agent must achieve sub-goal φi before φi+1 .The depth of a sequential goal is the number of sub-goals depth (ψ) = n. A composite goal is a disjunction of one or more sequential goals ψ = Wmi=1 ψi, i.e. the agent must achieve any sub-goal ψi to achieve ψ. The depth of a composite goal is the max depth of its sub-goals depth (ψ) = max ψi depth (ψi). Ψn is the set of all com-posite goals ψ with depth (ψ) ≤ n.

Figure 2: The agent-environment system. Agents are maps from states st (or histories) and goals ψ to actions at. The dashed line represents Algorithm 1, which recovers the environment transition probabilities from this agent map. 

Example: A maintenance robot is given the task of fix-ing a faulty machine, or finding an engineer and alerting them that the machine is broken. Fixing the machine re-quires performing a sequence of predetermined actions 

a1, a 2, . . . , a N and each time attaining the desired out-come s1, s 2, . . . , s N , which can be represented as the se-quential goal ψ1 = ⟨φ1, φ 2, . . . , φ N ⟩ = [ A = a1, S =

s1] ∧ ⃝ ([ A = a1, S = s1] ∧ ⃝ (. . . )) (using simplified notation for [( s, a ) ∈ g]). Finding and alerting the engi-neer requires the robot to navigate to an engineer S = seng 

and alerting them A = a′, ψ2 = ♢([ S = seng , A = a′]) .The robot’s goal can be represented as the composite goal 

ψ = ψ1 ∨ ψ2.

2.4. Agents 

Our aim is to formulate a minimalist definition of an agent capable of achieving a range of goals in its environment. To this end we focus on goal-conditioned agents (Liu et al., 2022; Schaul et al., 2015), which are policies π that map histories and goals to actions, π : ht, ψ 7 → at (Figure 2). Note this does not restrict us to agents that can condition their actions on the full history of the environment, as any policy (e.g. a Markov policy) can be represented in this way. For simplicity, we assume that the environment is fully observed by the agent, and that the agent follows a deterministic policy. This leads to a natural definition of an optimal goal-conditioned agent for a given environment and set of goals Ψ, which is a policy that maximizes the probability that ψ is achieved, for all ψ ∈ Ψ.

Definition 4 (optimal goal-conditioned agent) . For a given set of goals Ψ (Def. 3) an optimal agent is a goal-conditioned policy π∗(at | ht; ψ) where π∗ is deterministic and satisfies, 

π∗ = arg max 

> π

P (τ |= ψ | π, s 0) (1) 

∀ s0 s.t. P (s0) > 0, where s0 is the initial state of the 

3General agents need world models 

environment at t = 0 , and ∀ ψ ∈ Ψ.

Real agents are rarely optimal, especially when operating in complex environments and for tasks that require coor-dinating many sub-goals over long time horizons. Hence, we relax Def. 4 to define a bounded agent that is capable of achieving goals of some maximum goal depth Ψn with a failure rate that is bounded relative to the optimal agent. Bounded agents are defined by two parameters; i) a failure rate δ ∈ [0 , 1] , which places a lower bound on the proba-bility that the agent achieves a goal compared an optimal agent (analogous to regret), and ii) a maximum goal depth 

n, such that this regret bound holds only for goals with a depth less than or equal to n. This naturally captures the type of agents we are interested in—those which have some capability (parameterised by δ) for achieving goals of some maximum complexity Ψn.

Definition 5 (bounded goal-conditioned agent) . A bounded goal-conditioned agent is a goal-conditioned policy π(at |

ht; ψ) satisfying, 

P (τ |= ψ | π, s 0) ≥ max  

> π

P (τ |= ψ | π, s 0)(1 − δ) (2) 

∀ ψ ∈ Ψn where n is the maximum goal depth and s0 is the initial state of the environment at t = 0 .

Importantly, Def. 5 only assumes a level of competence 

for the agent. We do not, for example, impose any ratio-nality assumptions on the agent as in (Von Neumann & Morgenstern, 2007; Savage, 1972), which are not satisfied by current agents (Raman et al., 2024b). 

Example: Following the previous example, the perfor-mance of the maintenance robot is measured by the proba-bility that it either fixes the machine or alerts an engineer, i.e. 

P (τ |= φ1 ∨ φ2 | π, s 0). This intuitively involves weighing up the two possible courses of action; if the repair is difficult then directly attempting it could lead to failure, and finding an engineer is the better course of action. Or if the proba-bility of finding an engineer is very low, attempting to fix the machine may be the best strategy. Whatever the agent chooses to do, we can measure its performance relative to the probability that the optimal agent will solve the task, 

P (τ |= φ1 ∨ φ2 | π∗, s 0).

2.5. World models 

We are interested in the role of world models in goal-directed behaviour. Hence we focus on predictive world models, which can be used by agents to plan. This fol-lows the definition of world models used in reinforcement learning (RL), as opposed to the use of the term to de-scribe representations of the environment state alone (e.g. in Li et al. (2022); Gurnee & Tegmark (2023b)). For model-based RL agents, explicit world models are usu-ally one-step predictors of the environment state (Sutton, 2018), which in Markovian environments are sufficient to predict the evolution of the environment under arbitrary policies. We define a world model as any approximation 

ˆPss ′ (a) of the transition function of the environment (Def. 1) 

Pss ′ (a) = P (St+1 = s′ | At = a, S t = s), with bounded error | ˆPss ′ (a) − Pss ′ (a)| ≤ ϵ.

# 3. Results 

Our main result is a proof by reduction—we assume the agent is a bounded goal-conditioned agent (Def. 5), i.e. it has some (lower bounded) competency at goal-directed tasks of some finite depth n (Def. 3).We then prove that an approximation of the environment’s transition function (a world model) is determined by the agent’s policy alone, with bounded error. Hence, learning such a goal-conditioned policy is informationally equivalent to learning an accurate world model. 

Theorem 1. Let Pss ′ (a) = P (St+1 = s′ | At = a, S t = s)

be the transition probabilities of an environment satisfying Assumption 1. Let π be a goal-conditioned agent (Def. 5) with a maximum failure rate δ for all goals ψ ∈ Ψn where 

Ψn is the set of all composite goals with maximum goal depth n > 1. π fully determines a model for the environment transition probabilities ˆPss ′ (a) with errors satisfying 

ˆPss ′ (a) − Pss ′ (a) ≤

s

2Pss ′ (a)(1 − Pss ′ (a)) (n − 1)(1 − δ)

for any n, δ , and for δ ≪ 1, n ≫ 1 the error scales as, 

ˆPss ′ (a) − Pss ′ (a) ∼ O  δ/ √n + O(1 /n )

Proof in Appendix A.6. 

In Appendix A.5 we give a simplified overview of the proof of Theorem 1. We derive an algorithm that queries the goal-conditioned policy with different goals ψ ∈ Ψn which correspond to either-or decisions between two incompatible sub-goals ψ = ψa ∨ ψb. As the agent satisfies a regret bound, its choice of action encodes information about which of the sub-goals has a higher maximum probability of being satisfied, and this information can be used to estimate the transition probabilities ˆPss ′ (a). We then prove that this estimate satisfies the error bounds stated in Theorem 1. Note that while the statement of Theorem 1 assumes the agent has a maximum failure rate (regret bound) δ for all ψ ∈ Ψn,in fact our proof only requires the agent satisfies this regret bound for a small subset of Ψn consisting of n composite goals (see discussion of emergent capabilities in Section 4). Our algorithm for recovering a bounded-error world model from a bounded goal-conditioned agent (Algorithm 1) is detailed in Appendix C. It is universal, meaning the same 4General agents need world models 

algorithm works for all agents satisfying Def. 5 and all envi-ronments satisfying Assumption 1. It is also unsupervised; the only input to the algorithm is the agent’s policy π. The existence of this algorithm, which converts π into a bounded error world model, implies the world model is encoded in the agent’s policy, and learning such policy is information-ally equivalent to learning a world model. Formally, the approximate world model ˆPss ′ (a) is identifiable given the agent’s policy and our assumptions (see for example Barein-boim et al. (2022)). In Section 5 we compare Algorithm 1 and its assumptions to methods for recovering world models in mechanistic interpretability, which similarly use the exis-tence of a recovery map establish that an agent has learned a world model. 

Properties of the world model. The accuracy of the world model recovered from the agent in Theorem 1 increases as the agent approaches optimality ( δ → 0), and/or as the depth n of sequential goals it can achieve increases. A key consequence of the derived error bounds is that for any δ < 1

we can recover an arbitrarily accurate world model if we can make n sufficiently large. Therefore, in order to achieve long horizon goals even with a high failure rate δ ∼ 1, the agent must have learned a highly accurate world model. The error bounds also depend on the transition probabilities, and dividing both sides of the bound by Pss ′ (a) shows that the relative error ˆPss ′ (a)/P ss ′ (a) can become very large for Pss ′ (a) ≪ 1. This means that for any δ > 0 and/or finite n, there can exist low probability transitions that the agent is not required to learn. This matches the intuition that sub-optimal or finite-horizon agents need only learn relatively sparse world models covering the more common transitions, but achieving goals with higher success rate or longer horizons requires higher resolution world models. Theorem 1 imparts only a trivial error bound on the world model we can extract from agents whose maximum goal depth is n = 1 . It is not immediately clear if this means that agents that only optimize for immediate outcomes ( myopic 

agents) do not need to learn a world model, or if Theorem 1 simply fails to capture this class of agents. To resolve this we derive a result for myopic agents, which satisfy a regret bound for n = 1 and only a trivial regret bound ( δ = 1 ) for any n > 1.

Theorem 2. Let the set of myopic goals Ψmyopic be the subset of depth-1 composite goals Ψ1 such that the goal state(s) must be attained immediately after the agents first action, φ = ⃝[( s, a ) ∈ g]. We define an optimal myopic agent as a policy π∗(at | ht, ψ ) that is optimal for all ψ ∈

Ψmyopic . For an environment satisfying Assumption 1, any bounds on the transition probabilities | ˆPss ′ (a)−Pss ′ (a)| ≤ 

ϵ than can be determined from π∗ are trivial ( ϵ = 1 ) and tight. Proof in Appendix B. 

Theorem 2 implies that there exists no procedure that can 

Figure 3: a) shows the mean error in the world model re-covered by Algorithm 2, ⟨ϵ⟩, decrease as the agent learns to generalize to higher depth goals. Nmax (⟨δ⟩ = 0 .04) is the maximum goal depth such that the agent achieves a mean regret ≤ 0.04 . The scaling is O(n−1/2), as with the scaling between the worst-case error ϵ and worst-case re-gret δ in Theorem 1. b) shows the mean error scaling with 

⟨δ(n = 50) ⟩, the mean regret the agent achieves for depth 

n = 50 goals. For both figures, error bars show 95% confi-dence intervals for the mean over 10 experiments where we re-trained the agents with different experience trajectories of the same length. even partially determine the transition probabilities from the policy of a myopic agent. In the proof of Theorem 2 we show this by explicitly construct a myopic agent that is optimal for any choice of Pss ′ (a) ∈ [0 , 1] , and so the policy of such an agent can only impart trivial bounds on the transition probabilities. Therefore, learning a world model with is not necessary for myopic agents—world models only become necessary for agents pursuing goals with multiple sub-goals and over multi-step horizons. 

3.1. Experiments 

We demonstrate our procedure for recovering a world model from an agent, and how the accuracy of the model increases as the agent learns to generalize to more tasks (longer hori-zon goals). We also investigate if our algorithm can re-cover the transition function when the agent strongly vi-olates our assumptions (Def. 5). Specifically, a realistic agent could be highly competent ( δ ∼ 0) for some depth-n

goals but completely fail for others ( δ = 1 ). This agent would violate any non-trivial regret bound as in Def. 5, resulting in trivial model-error bounds in Theorem 1. To explore this case we relax Def. 5 and consider agents where the regret bound holds only on average over some set of goals Ψ, i.e. ⟨δ⟩ ≤ k where ⟨δ⟩ is the average value of 

1 − P (τ |= ψ | π, s 0)/ max π P (τ |= ψ | π, s 0) over all 

ψ ∈ Ψ. We then determine empirically how the average er-ror ⟨ϵ⟩ in the world model recovered by Algorithm 1 scales with the agent’s average regret ⟨δ⟩ (Figure 3 b)), where 

ϵ := | ˆPss ′ (a) − Pss ′ (a)| and ⟨ϵ⟩ is mean value of ϵ over all transitions (s, a, s ′).5General agents need world models 

The environment used to test our algorithms is a randomly generated cMP satisfying Assumption 1, comprising of 20 states and 5 actions with a sparse transition function. We train our agent using trajectories sampled from the environ-ment under a random policy, and we increase the compe-tency of our agent by increasing the length of the trajectory it is trained on, Nsamples . See Appendix D for further de-tails on the agent and experimental setup. We recover the world model using Algorithm 2, a simplified version of Algorithm 1. As we increase Nsamples we observe the agent can generalize to longer horizon goals, captured by N (⟨δ⟩ = k) which is the maximum goal depth n such that the agent achieves an average regret ⟨δ⟩ = k for goals of depth n. We find that for all Nsamples tested, and for all goal deptsh n, our agent agent achieved a worst-case regret δ = 1 for some goals, i.e. the agent violates any non-trivial regret bound of the form Def. 5. Nevertheless, we find that Algorithm 2 recovers the transition function with a low average error (Figure 3 b)), which scales as ∼ O (n−1/2), like the error bound in Theorem 1. Hence, in spite of the agent violating our assumptions and achieving maximal regret for some goals, the average error has a similar decay with the goal depth as when the worst-case regret bound (Def. 5) is satis-fied. Therefore, we can still accurately recover the transition function from the agent as long as it achieves a relatively low average regret for long horizon goals. 

# 4. Discussion 

We now discuss the consequences of Theorem 1 and its limitations. 

No model-free path to general agents. Theorem 1 implies that any agent that satisfies a regret bound as in Def. 5 must have learned an implicit world model, and the accuracy of the model increases as the regret δ decreases or the maxi-mum goal depth n increases. In other words, there is no way to train an agent capable of generalizing to long horizon tasks without learning a world model, and the fidelity of the model bounds the agent’s capabilities. This removes a key motivation for model-free approaches, as learning a world model cannot be avoided. On the other hand, it mo-tivates explicitly model-based architectures (LeCun, 2022; Hafner et al., 2023; Schrittwieser et al., 2020), which can directly attack the model learning problem, and can exploit their benefits in terms of sample efficiency (Hafner et al., 2019), planning (Sutton, 2018), interpretability (Glanois et al., 2024) and safety (Amodei et al., 2016). 

Emergent capabilities. An accurate world model is a pow-erful tool—it can be used to determine low-regret policies for any well-defined objective, without requiring further in-teraction with the environment or task-specific data. Hence, implicit world models have been proposed as an explana-tion for emergent capabilities in foundation models (Brown et al., 2020; Li et al., 2022; Abdou et al., 2021). Our results support this hypothesis by revealing a mechanism by which implicit world models could emerge during training. To minimize regret across a variety of training tasks, agents are required to learn an implicit world model, which in turn could support generalization to a wide range of tasks the agent was never explicitly trained on. Note that for simplic-ity we have stated Theorem 1 with the assumption that the agent can generalize to any depth-n composite goal Ψn, but this is not the strongest statement of the result. In the proof (Appendix A.6) the agent is required to generalize only to a small subset of Ψn, comprising of n simple composite goals (see also Algorithm 1). There are likely many such choices of subsets of Ψn (e.g. a different sufficient set is used in Algorithm 2, Appendix C), and there are likely other tasks beyond achieving composite goals (Def. 3) that are sufficient to derive the result. Our findings therefore point to the existence of sets of simple tasks, where learning to perform these tasks implies sufficient world knowledge to (in principle) generalize to any task. Beyond planning, world models support domain adaptation (Chua et al., 2018), reasoning about uncertainty (Lockwood & Si, 2022) and social cognition (Rabinowitz et al., 2018). With additional structural assumptions, they can also sup-port causal reasoning (Pearl, 2018), simulating counterfac-tual trajectories and imagination (Racani `ere et al., 2017), and reasoning about intent (Ward et al., 2024) and attribu-tion (Chockler & Halpern, 2004). Theorem 1 provides a simple explanation for how this wide range of cognitive abilities, associated primarily with human-level intelligence (Tomasello, 2022), can emerge from simple goal-directed behaviour. This could explain away several prominent theo-ries for how these capabilities arose in nature, which propose specific environmental factors such as resource uncertainty (Hills et al., 2015) and social complexity (Dunbar, 1998) as the driving force for their emergence. The composite goals used in the proof of Theorem 1 describe simple either-or navigation tasks in a single-agent environment. If an agent was required to solve these tasks without repeated attempts (zero-shot), perhaps due to risk of death, this would require the agent to satisfy a regret bound as in Def. 5, and hence learn a world model capable of supporting these capabilities, without needing to invoke novel environmental or social factors. 

Safety. Several proposals for AI safety and alignment re-quire an accurate predictive model of the agent-environment system to verify the safety of plans (Bengio et al., 2024; Dalrymple et al., 2024), safely explore (Brunke et al., 2022), predict human responses (Leike et al., 2018), avoid prob-lematic incentives (Farquhar et al., 2022), and incorporate model-based concepts into decision making such as intent 6General agents need world models 

(Ward et al., 2024), deception (Ward et al., 2023) and harm (Richens et al., 2022; Bengio et al., 2024). Other proposals focus on passive oracles (essentially world models), avoid-ing agents altogether due to their inherent safety issues (Bengio et al., 2025; Armstrong & O’Rorke, 2017). One major impediment to these approaches is the reasonable expectation that the capabilities of model-free agents will outpace our ability to learn accurate predictive models of complex real-world environments. There are already sev-eral examples of AI systems that can solve prediction tasks in domains we cannot yet model (Abramson et al., 2024; Merchant et al., 2023), and it is intuitively hard to inter-pret, audit and correct the behaviour of black-box agents operating in environments we do not understand, or where the agent has superior world knowledge than the supervi-sor (Christiano et al., 2021). Our results point to solution, providing a theoretical guarantee that we can extract an accurate world model from any sufficiently capable model-free agent. Importantly, the fidelity of this model increases with the agent’s capabilities, especially as agent gets better at achieving goals over long time horizons—precisely the regime where safety concerns such as reward hacking be-come important (Farquhar et al., 2025). Future work should explore developing scalable algorithms for eliciting these world models and using them to improve agent safety. 

Limits on strong AI. Our ability to learn accurate models of the world is fundamentally limited by the openness of real-world systems, their complexity and unpredictability, confounding, limited data, and the curse of dimensionality (Box & Draper, 1987). Theorem 1 implies that training an agent capable of generalizing to a wide range of tasks in the real world is extremely hard—at least as hard (and possibly much harder) than learning an accurate model of the world. While ‘thinking slow’ (Kahneman, 2011) deliberative plan-ning and reasoning is not necessary (or even desirable) in every situation—for example, humans also generalize to novel tasks through ‘thinking fast’ heuristics (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974) and similarity-based generalization (Shep-ard, 1987)—our results establish that for any agent, natural or artificial, their ability to generalize is ultimately bounded by their ability to learn how the world works. One consequence is that regret-bounded agents (Def. 5) are effectively limited to domains that are ‘solvable’, i.e. where we can feasibly learn a model of the underlying dynamics and use it to plan over long horizons. In domains where this is infeasible, there can be no guarantee the agent will generalize (satisfy a non-trivial regret bound δ < 1) for long horizon tasks ( n ≫ 1). Therefore, some amount of online learning will be necessary, which is limited by the speed of interaction with the environment. Note that our results are derived for the simplest non-trivial environments (Assumption 1), and it is likely these constraints will be even stronger in more realistic environments which incorporate partially observed states or non-Markovian dynamics. 

Limitations. The proof of Theorem 1 considers only fully observed environments. It is not clear what an agent op-erating in a partially observed environment would have to learn about latent variables in order to achieve the same level of behavioural flexibility. It is important to clarify that Theorem 1 proves the existence of a world model encoded in the agent’s policy, not its specific use (e.g. for planning), nor can we make deeper epistemological claims about what the agent knows about its environment (Fagin et al., 2004). 

# 5. Related work 

Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) (Ng et al., 2000) and inverse planning (Baker et al., 2007) involve determin-ing an agents reward function (or goal) given the transition function and the optimal policy. Similarly, planning is the process of determining an optimal policy given the tran-sition function and a goal (reward). Our result fills in the remaining direction, recovering the transition function given the agent’s goal and their regret-bounded policy. In IRL the reward function can only be fully determined if we know the optimal policy across multiple environments (Amin & Singh, 2016), and likewise we find that to fully determine the environment transition function we must know the opti-mal policy for multiple goals. Figure 1 shows how our result relates to planning and IRL, where for each process takes as input two elements from {environment, goal, policy }, and determines the missing third element. 

Mechanistic Interpretability (MI) aims to uncover implicit world models within model-free agents (Abdou et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Gurnee & Tegmark, 2023a; Karvonen, 2024; Hou et al., 2023; Bush et al., 2025). This typically involves learning a map from a policy network’s activations to fea-tures representing states S (e.g. the board states of a game (Li et al., 2022)). The state-space (ontology) S is either assumed (as in supervised probing Alain & Bengio (2016)) or identified through unsupervised learning (as with SAEs Bricken et al. (2023)). The causal role of these features in the agent’s decision making is established by intervening on their representations and observing the policy changes consistently, as if the world state had changed. Our work also establishes an agent has learned a world model by the existence of a recovery map, but crucially this map is from the agent’s policy rather than its activations. This is strictly weaker (as the policy is a function of the activations), and so Algorithm 1 can be used even when activations are inaccessible (e.g. private weights). This also allows us to tie the existence of a world model to agent capabilities (regret bounds as in Def. 5) rather than the specifics of the agent architecture, and Algorithm 1 applies 7General agents need world models 

to all agents satisfying Def. 5 and environments satisfying Assumption 1. By comparison, probes or SAEs are fit to a given agent-environment system, and may require retraining if either changes (e.g. through distributional shifts or weight updates). Also Algorithm 1 is unsupervised, whereas MI methods are at least partially supervised, which can lead to ambiguity as to where the world model is encoded (in the agent, the probe, or jointly). Another key difference is that we recover a predictive world model ˆPss ′ (a) capturing environment dynamics, rather than simply a state space representation S. However, our aim is to prove the agent has learned the actual environment dynamics up to an error bound, not to recover the subjective world model used by the agent to generate its actions. As discussed in the paragraph ‘representation theorems’ below, if we introduce additional consistency assumptions similar to those used MI 1, we can recover the agent’s subjective world model. One drawback is that we may underestimate what an agent knows about its environment—e.g. agents could learn a world model but strongly violate Def. 5 (e.g. due to errors in planning), so Algorithm 1 isn’t guaranteed to recover this world knowledge whereas methods like probing may succeed. However, Section 3.1 shows that at least in simple environments, our procedure can work well even when the regret bound is trivialised ( δ = 1 ). 

Causal world models. (Richens & Everitt, 2024) provides a similar result to Theorem 1, showing that an agent capable of adapting to a sufficiently large set of distributional shifts must have learned a causal world model. Our work has a different focus: we study an agents ability to generalize to new goals (task generalization) rather than adapting to new environments (domain generalization). A surprising consequence of our result combined with Richens & Everitt (2024) is that domain generalization requires strictly more knowledge of the environment than task generalization. To see this, consider a setting where the state comprises two variables S = X × Y and X → Y . We can construct an optimal goal-conditioned agent (Def. 4) given the transi-tion function Pss ′ (a) = P (Xt+1 = x′, Y t+1 = y′ | At =

a, X t = x, Y t = y), as an optimal goal-conditioned policy can be determined by planning on this model. However, the causal relation between X → Y is non-identifiable from Pss ′ (a), i.e. almost all distributions Pss ′ (a) are com-patible with both X → Y and X ← Y . Therefore, task generalization does not require knowledge of the causal re-lation between concurrent environment variables Xt and Yt

> 1Consistency in MI requires the agent adapts their behaviour following interventions on their world model. This amounts to assuming regret-bounded behavior under interventions, which is tantamount to assuming the agent has a causal world model to begin with (Richens & Everitt, 2024). Hence, using this kind of interventional consistency to establish that an agent has a world model risks circular reasoning.

whereas domain generalization does. That said, in the cMP setting the transition function does encode a degree of causal information, and we leave it to future work to determine precisely what causal knowledge is required for an agent satisfying Def. 5. This hints at an agential version of Pearl’s causal hierarchy (Bareinboim et al., 2022), where differ-ent agent capabilities (like domain or task generalization) provably require different degrees of causal knowledge. 

LTL goal-conditioned agents. LTL is the natural choice for expressing instructions, goals and safety constraints in reinforcement learning and planning (Camacho et al., 2019). Recently, there have been several implementations of goal-conditioned agents that generalize zero-shot to arbitrary LTL goals (Qiu et al., 2023; Jackermeier & Abate, 2025; Vaezipoor et al., 2021; Kuo et al., 2020). This maps pre-cisely onto the setting we study, and future work could ex-plore using Algorithm 1 or variants to recover world models from these agents, and use them to debug agent behaviour. 

Representation theorems such as Savage (1972) and Halpern & Piermont (2024), establish that agents satisfying certain rationality axioms behave as if they are maximiz-ing the expected value of a utility function with respect to a world model. For example, Savage (1972) can be used to ‘fit’ a world model to agent’s behaviour, determining a unique utility function U (s′) and set of beliefs (a world model ˆPss ′ (a)) such that the policy that maximizes E ˆP [U ]

is identical to the agents policy. However, this says nothing about what (if anything) the agent has learned about the true environment dynamics. For example, we may be able to assign a specific world model and utility function to a purely random policy π(a | s) = 1 /|A|, but this clearly does not imply that learning a world model is necessary to gener-ate a random policy. Instead of attempting to recover an agent’s subjective world model, we aim to recover the true underlying dynamics of the environment from the policy of the agent. In doing so, we show that learning such a policy implies learning these dynamics, and so the learnability of these dynamics bounds agent capabilities. Further, Theo-rem 2 establishes that an optimal myopic agent does not 

need to learn the transition probabilities Pss ′ (a), and repre-sentation theorems typically focus on the myopic regime. We can recover something like the agent’s subjective world model by changing Def. 5 to the assumption that the agent is δ-optimal with respect to its own world model M,

PM(τ |= ψ | π, s 0) ≥ max  

> π

PM(τ |= ψ | π, s 0)(1 − δ)

(3) This amounts to assuming the agent has a world model, and that its behaviour is highly consistent with this world model (with consistency given by δ), but stops short of as-suming the agent is optimal with respect to its own beliefs. For example, δ > 0 could represent a sub-optimal planner. For this altered Def. 5, Theorem 1 is unchanged and Algo-8General agents need world models 

rithm 1 returns the agents subjective world model M with bounded error. This may be appealing as a representation theorem as it has much weaker assumptions than Savage (1972), e.g. we only assume the agent follows a policy that is imperfectly consistent with its beliefs, whereas Savage (1972) requires the agent specifies a preference order over all actions (whereas a policy specifies only the most pre-ferred action(s)), and makes strong rationality assumptions which are not satisfied by most current systems (Raman et al., 2024a). 

Good regulator theorem. This influential theorem attempts to establish a similar result to ours, than any agent capable of controlling a system is in some sense a model of that system (Conant & Ross Ashby, 1970). However, as pointed out in (Wentworth, 2021), what the theorem actually shows is that, under several strong assumptions, an agent that minimizes the entropy of its environment must have a deterministic policy. This deterministic policy is then interpreted as a model of the environment, with the actions assigned to different states corresponding to a state representation. This is in spite of the fact that the policy (and hence the world model) could be a constant function, assigning the same action to every state. We do not consider an agent having a deterministic policy to be meaningful evidence that the agent has a model of its environment, and our theorem less ambiguously demonstrates that a world model capable of predicting the evolution of the environment has been learned by the agent. 

Theories of agency. That agents have world models is a foundational assumption for several prominent theories in psychology and neuroscience; from constructivist theories of perception (Gregory, 1980) to active inference (Friston, 2010) and theories of consciousness (Safron, 2020). Like representation theorems, these theories aim to provide ex-planatory models of natural agents, rather than proving that agents necessarily conform to their assumptions. Our results offer a strong theoretical justification for these frameworks by demonstrating that goal-directed agents must acquire world models to achieve a degree of behavioural flexibility. Moreover, our findings remove the need to assume agents have world models a priori. Instead, we can assume a level of competency which implies their existence—arguably a more defensible position as competence can be measured. 

# 6. Conclusion 

The idea that the microstructure of an agent reflects the macrostructure of its environment is not new. It can be traced as far back as Democritus, who claimed that “man is a microcosm”—a miniature reflection of the cosmos (Allers, 1944)—and persists in contemporary scientific thinking— for example, Friston’s assertion that “an agent does not have a model of it’s world—it is a model” (Friston, 2013). While this relation between agents and environments has long been hypothesised, we have sought to formalise and prove it. We have shown that any agent capable of generalizing to a suffi-ciently wide range of simple goal-directed tasks, must have learned an accurate model of it’s environment. Essentially, all the information required to accurately simulate the en-vironment is contained in the agent’s policy. This implies that learning a world model is not only beneficial, but neces-sary for general agents. Consequently, efforts to create truly general AI cannot sidestep the challenge of world modeling, and instead should embrace it to unlock further capabilities and address critical issues in safety and interpretability. Future work could extend our analysis to different classes of goals beyond Def. 3, and identify sets of simple ‘univer-sal’ tasks that are sufficient to imply an agent has learned a world model. These tasks may then be useful for training general agents. Our results also point to new methods for inferring an agent’s beliefs from their goals and behaviour without making strong rationality assumptions. Future work could build on Algorithm 1 to develop algorithms for recov-ering world models that are more scalable or apply to more general environments, and using these to improve agent safety and interpretability. On the more foundational level, Theorem 1 gives theoretical support to work in mechanistic interpretability looking to uncover implicit world models— for any agent capable of sufficiently general goal-directed behavior, the world model must be in there. Future work could use this necessity to derive new fundamental bounds on agent capabilities from the learnability of world models. 

# Impact statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 9General agents need world models 

# A. Proof of Theorem 1 

A.1. Notation 

In the following we denote random variables as capital letters X and lower case letters x denoting an event X = x

(equivalently, a value or state of X). We use bold letters to denote sets of variables X = {X1, X 2, . . . , X m} and x denotes a set of events {x1, x 2, . . . , x m}. We use square brackets to denote a proposition, e.g. [X = x] returns True if X = x and False otherwise. I(p) denotes an indicator function, which returns 1 if the proposition p is True and 0 if False. 

A.2. Environments Definition 1 (Controlled Markov process) . A controlled Markov process (cMP) is a Markov decision process (MDP) without a specified reward function or discount factor. It is defined by the tuple (S, A, P ss ′ (a)) where S is the state space, A is the action space, and Pss ′ (a) = P (S = s′ | A = a, S = s) is the transition function. 

First we assume the environment is described by a finite-dimensional, irreducible, controlled Markov process. For discussion of these standard assumptions see Puterman, 2014; Sutton, 2018. 

Assumption 1. We assume the environment is described by an irreducible, stationary, finite, controlled Markov process (Def. 1) with at least two actions. 

In the following we use S = st and A = at to denote the state of the environment and a the agent’s choice of action at time 

t. The sequence of successive environment states and actions are referred to as a trajectory τ = ( s0, a 0, s 1, a 1, . . . ), with τ

denoting an infinite length trajectory and we introduce an index ti:j = ( si, a i, . . . , s t, a t) to denote a finite length trajectory between times i and j. In some settings we use hi:t = ( si, a i, . . . , s t) to denote a finite length trajectory that should be interpreted as a history, i.e. a trajectory that has occurred, and which is truncated at st (i.e. does not include at). 

A.3. Goals 

Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) (Pnueli, 1977; Baier & Katoen, 2008) is a formalism widely used for expressing instructions, goals and safety constraints for agents (Littman et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Hasanbeig et al., 2019; Dzifcak et al., 2009; Ding et al., 2014). LTL extends classical propositional logic by introducing operators for reasoning about sequences of states over time, primary among them being, • ⃝ (Next): The property holds in the next state, • ♢ (Eventually): The property will hold at some point in the future, • □ (Always): The property holds at every state from now on, • U (Until): One property holds until another becomes true, which can be combined with standard logical connectives (AND ∧, OR ∨, NOT ¬ and material implication →) to create complex goal specifications. The environment + agent system is described by the joint states (st, a t) where st is the state of the environment and at is the agent’s action, at time t. Trajectories (paths) are a sequence of these states which we denote 

τ = ( s0, a 0, s 1, a 2, . . . ). An LTL expression φ assigns a truth value to a given trajectory τ , denoted τ |= φ, which is true if 

τ satisfies φ and false otherwise, with evaluation beginning at t = 0 . For example, the trajectory of the environment-agent system τ = ( s0 = 0 , a 0 = 0 , s 1 = 1 , a 0 = 0 , . . . ) satisfies φ = [ s = 0] ∧ ⃝ [s = 1] as the agent is in state s = 0 initially (at time t = 0 ) and in the next time step is in state s = 1 .Our desire is to define a minimal class of goals that describe the simplest and most intuitive goal-directed behaviours. To this end we focus on the most common definition of goals as being desirable states of the environment-agent system (Liu et al., 2022), which must be achieved within some time horizon. 

Definition 2 (Goals) . A goal φ is an LTL expression of the form φ = O([( s, a ) ∈ g]) where, 

• g is a set of goal-states, a sub-set of the joint states of the environment-agent system (s, a ) ∈ S × A,

• O is a temporal operator specifying the time horizon for reaching g. We restrict to O ∈ {⃝ , ♢, ⊤} where ⃝ = Next, 

♢ = Eventually, ⊤ = Now. 

10 General agents need world models 

Rather than considering time horizons at the level of specific time indices t, which would require the agent to be capable of a high degree of environment control (e.g. ‘reach state S = s in precisely three time steps’), we focus on two simple time horizons; goals that are achieved immediately (now, ⊤), in the next time step (next, ⃝), or at any time in the future (eventually, ♢). Note that in LTL expressions the ‘now’ temporal operator is the identity, and we use ⊤ (True) to denote this. As ⊤([ X = x]) = [ X = x] we suppress ⊤, e.g. φi = [( s, a ) ∈ gi], for ease of notation. 

Example: consider the following goal for a cleaning robot: move eventually to the kitchen and in the next time step turn on the dish washer. This goal can be expressed as φ = ♢([ S = in kitchen ] ∧ ⃝ [A = turn on dishwasher ]) . A trajectory τ

satisfies this goal (denoted τ |= φ) if ∃ t s.t. St = in kitchen and At+1 = turn on dishwasher Going beyond the simplest, one-step goal-directed tasks requires an agent to achieve multiple sub-goals in a particular order. Our aim is to define a sequential goal ψ in such a way that τ |= ψ is true if and only if each sub-goal state gi is reached by the agent in the correct order. Expressing these sequential goals in LTL can be cumbersome, so for notational neatness we define a sequential goal formula ψ = ⟨φ1, . . . , φ L⟩ which stands in for the more complex LTL expression, which is given by the the recursive formula in Def. 3. It will not be necessary to define sequential goals in general, as for our proofs we will focus on a simple class of sequential goals where the agent must reach a goal state either immediately or eventually. 

Definition 6 (Sequential goals) . ψ = ⟨φ1, φ 2, . . . , φ L⟩ denotes the sequence of sub-goals (Def. 2) φ1, φ 2, . . . , φ n, where 

φi = Oi([( s, a ) ∈ gi]) , Oi ∈ { ♢, ⊤} and n = depth (ψ) is the goal depth. ψ can be expressed in linear temporal logic using the following recursive formula, 

⟨φ1, φ 2, . . . , φ L⟩ =



[( s, a ) ∈ g1] ∧ ⟨ φ2, . . . , φ L⟩ , O1 = ⊤⃝ ([( s, a ) ∈ g1] ∧ ⟨ φ2, . . . , φ L⟩) , O1 = ⃝

[( s, a )̸ ∈ g1]U ([( s, a ) ∈ g1] ∧ ⟨ φ2, . . . , φ L⟩) , O1 = ♢

(4) 

where ⊤ = True and Oi = ⊤ denotes the Now (trivial) temporal operator, and for the singleton ⟨φ⟩ = φ.

By applying (4) recursively we can convert any sequential goal ψ into an LTL expression. To understand (4) we can consider the simple case with two sub-goals ψ = ⟨φ1, φ 2⟩ and trajectory τ = ( s0, a 0, s 1, a 1, . . . ). If O1 = ⊤, then ψ is satisfied if 

(s0, a 0) ∈ g1 and the trajectory starting from the next time step τ1 = ( s1, a 1, s 2, a 2, . . . ) satisfies φ2. For O1 = ♢ the LTL expression we desire is ⟨φ1, φ 2⟩ = [( s, a )̸ ∈ g1]U([( s, a ) ∈ g1] ∧ φ2). To see this, consider the case where O2 = ⊤, i.e. the agent’s goal is to eventually reach g1, and then in the next time step to reach g2. If we attempt to express this goal as 

ψ = ♢([( s, a ) ∈ g1] ∧ φ2), note that τ |= ψ if ∃ t s.t. (st, a t) ∈ g1 and (st+1 , a t+1 ) ∈ g2. This includes trajectories where the agent reaches g1 and then fails to transition to g2 in the next time step, arbitrarily many times, so long as eventually the agent achieves the desired transition. Our aim is to express sequential goals where after satisfying a sub-goal φi the agent switches to pursuing the sub-goal φi+1 in the next time step, and if the agent fails to satisfy this sub-goal then it fails to satisfy the overall sequential goal. The expression [( s, a )̸ ∈ g1]U([( s, a ) ∈ g1] ∧ φ2) enforces the condition [( s, a )̸ ∈ g1]

(the agent is not in goal-state g1) until they eventually reach g1 at some t, and their trajectory commencing t + 1 satisfies φ2,which captures the desired goal-switching behaviour. 

Example: Consider the goal of transitioning eventually to S = s, then in the next time step transitioning to state 

S = s′ and then eventually returning to S = s. This is captured by the sequential goal ψ = ⟨φ1, φ 2, φ 1⟩ with sub-goals φ2 = ♢g1 where g1 = {(a, s ) ∀ a ∈ A} and φ1 = g2 where g1 = {(a, s ′) ∀ a ∈ A}. Applying (4) gives 

ψ = [( s, a )̸ ∈ g1]U([( s, a ) ∈ g1] ∧ ⃝ ([( s, a ) ∈ g2] ∧ ♢([( s, a ) ∈ g1])) , which is satisfied by any τ s.t. i) ∃ t s.t. St = s

and St′̸ = s ∀ t′ < t , ii) St+1 = s′ and ii) ∃ t′ > t + 1 s.t. St′ = s.Finally, we consider the case where there are multiple sequential goals the agent could satisfy, each corresponding to a different course of action that would be sufficient to achieve an overall goal. For example, a doctor’s goal of providing primary care to a patient can be satisfied by several mutually exclusive pathways, such as providing a primary diagnosis and prescription, referring to a specialist for diagnosis, and so on. Each of these is its own task described by a sequence of sub-goals (e.g. attempting a primary diagnosis may involve question asking, performing an examination, etc), the outcome of which can inform the path the doctor takes (e.g. if an examination is inconclusive, they may refer to a specialist). Each of these pathways therefore corresponds to a different sequential goal, and satisfying any of these sequential goals satisfies the overall goal of providing care to the patient. To formalise this we consider goals that are disjunctions over multiple sequential goals. Let Ψ denote the set of all composite 

goals, which includes all disjunctions over all sequential goals (Def. 6), i.e. ψ, ψ ′ ∈ Ψ =⇒ ψ ∨ ψ′ ∈ Ψ. For a conjunction 11 General agents need world models 

over goals ψ′′ = ψ ∨ ψ′, then agent satisfies ψ′′ if its policy generates a trajectory τ = ( s0, a 1, s 1, a 2, . . . ) that satisfies ψ or 

ψ′.

Definition 3 (Composite goals) . A sequential goal ψ is an ordered sequence of sub-goals (Def. 2) ψ = ⟨φ1, . . . φ n⟩, where the agent must achieve sub-goal φi before φi+1 . The depth of a sequential goal is the number of sub-goals depth (ψ) = n. A composite goal is a disjunction of one or more sequential goals ψ = Wmi=1 ψi, i.e. the agent must achieve any sub-goal ψi

to achieve ψ. The depth of a composite goal is the max depth of its sub-goals depth (ψ) = max ψi depth (ψi). Ψn is the set of all composite goals ψ with depth (ψ) ≤ n.

Example: Consider the simple navigation task where a robot cleaner is required to clean the kitchen and the living room in any order, and then return to its charging station. There are two pathways that satisfy this; 1) clean the kitchen (eventually), then clean the living room (eventually), then return to the charging point (eventually), 2) the same as 1) but with the kitchen and living room swapped. Formally, the robot satisfies the overall goal if it generates a trajectory τ that satisfies the LTL expression ψ = ψ1 ∨ ψ2 where ψ1 = ⟨φ1, φ 2, φ 3⟩, ψ1 = ⟨φ2, φ 1, φ 3⟩, φ1 = ♢([( s, a ) ∈ g1 = {(s1, a 1)}]) , φ2 =

♢([( s, a ) ∈ g2 = {(s2, a 1)}]) , φ3 = ♢([ s ∈ g3 = {s3}]) , s1 = in kitchen , s2 = in livingroom , s3 = at charging station and a1 = clean. 

A.4. Agents 

We assume the environment is described by a cMDP (Def. 1). Due to the generally non-Markovian nature of sequential goals, we consider the most general definition of agents as maps from histories and goals to actions. A goal conditioned agent is a policy π(at | ht; ψ), where ψ is a (composite) goal. For simplicity we restrict our attention to agents that follow deterministic policies. In general the environment may evolve non-deterministically, so the objective is to maximise the probability that τ |= ∨ψ, which is determined by summing over the probabilities of all trajectories that could result from π

and that satisfy ψ (Qiu et al., 2024). 

Definition 4 (optimal goal-conditioned agent) . For a given set of goals Ψ (Def. 3) an optimal agent is a goal-conditioned policy π∗(at | ht; ψ) where π∗ is deterministic and satisfies, 

π∗ = arg max 

> π

P (τ |= ψ | π, s 0) (1) 

∀ s0 s.t. P (s0) > 0, where s0 is the initial state of the environment at t = 0 , and ∀ ψ ∈ Ψ.

P (τ |= ψ | π, s 0) is the probability that the trajectory τ generated by the agent under policy π satisfies the composite goal 

ψ (LTL expression is given by Def. 3), 

P (τ |= ψ | π, s 0) = X

> τ

P (τ | π, s 0)I([ τ |= ψ]) (5) In other words, an optimal goal-conditioned agent can achieve any composite goal ψ ∈ Ψ with the maximum probability of success attainable for every initial state S0 = s0 that the agent could start in. It is of course unreasonable to assume that any realistic agent is capable of optimally satisfying any given composite goal ψ

in its environment, and so we consider two relaxations of Def. 4; sub-optimal agents, and restricted the complexity of the goals the agent is capable of achieving. Firstly, the most intuitive way to bound the agent’s optimality carries over from regret bounds in reinforcement learning (Sutton, 2018), but instead of providing a lower bound on the cumulative discounted reward compared to the optimal agent, we can lower bound on the probability that the agent achieves a given goal compared to the optimal agent. Secondly, achieving goals that involve a larger number of sub-goals (a higher goal depth n, Def. 3) is more difficult than achieving short-term or myopic goals, and intuitively requires more knowledge of the environment. For example, if we restricted to one-step goals ( Oi = ⊤ and n = 1 ), simply knowing arg max a Pss ′ (a) would be sufficient to identify an optimal policy, thus a full world model capable of simulating the environment is clearly not required. On the other hand, if an agent uses a world model to plan, effectively planning for longer sequences of sub-goals requires an increasingly accurate model, as errors compound over time. Hence, in deriving our results it is natural to consider agents with some bounded maximum goal depth n, such that there is no guarantee that agent can satisfy the regret bound for sequential goals with depth greater than n.12 General agents need world models 

To this end, we propose the following definition of a bounded goal-conditioned agent defined by two parameters; δ (the lower bound on the probability of achieving a goal compared to an optimal agent), and n (the maximum goal depth for which the δ bound applies). 

Definition 5 (bounded goal-conditioned agent) . A bounded goal-conditioned agent is a goal-conditioned policy π(at | ht; ψ)

satisfying, 

P (τ |= ψ | π, s 0) ≥ max  

> π

P (τ |= ψ | π, s 0)(1 − δ) (2) 

∀ ψ ∈ Ψn where n is the maximum goal depth and s0 is the initial state of the environment at t = 0 .

A.5. Overview of proof of Theorem 1 

At a high level, the proof of Theorem 1 can be understood as deriving an algorithm that estimates Pss ′ (a) by querying the bounded agent’s policy π(at | ht, ψ ) with different composite goals and observing how the agent’s action choice changes. We consider composite goals where the agent is required to navigate (eventually) to a specific state S = s and take an action 

A = a, transitioning to an outcome state, and then returns eventually to S = s (Figure 4). We compare two goals, the first 

ψ1(r, n ) which is satisfied if the outcome state is S = s at most r times, out of a total of n trials (taking action A = a in 

S = s), and the second ψ2(r, n ) where the outcome is S = s at least r + 1 times. An optimal agent can achieve the first 

Figure 4: Figure illustrates the composite goal in the proof of Theorem 1. goal with a probability given by the cumulative binomial distribution Pb(X ≤ r) where X is the total number of ‘successful’ transitions (a, s ) → s′, which occur with probability Pss ′ (a), and likewise the second goal can be achieved with probability 

Pb(X > r ). Hence, as we increase r from 0 to n, an optimal agent will switch from pursuing the second goal to pursuing the first goal when r reaches a value that exceeds the median number of successes, and we show it is possible to identify this ‘goal switching’ in the agent’s policy π(at | ht, ψ 1(r, n ) ∨ ψ2(r, n )) . The median is given by ⌊Pss ′ (a)( n + 1) ⌋ and so we can bound Pss ′ (a) with an error that scales as 1/n . For δ > 0, the goal-switching behaviour of the agent cannot precisely determine the median, but bounds it within a region, and this allows us to approximate Pss ′ (a) with an error that depends on 

δ.

A.6. Proof of Theorem 1 

We now prove our main results. 

Lemma 1. For a finite dimensional, stationary and irreducible cMPD (Assumption 1) there exists a deterministic Markovian policy πs′ (a | h = ( s0, a 0, . . . , s T )) = πs′ (a | sT ) that eventually reaches a given state S = s′ from any other state S = s

with probability 1. Proof. Irreducibility states that for any s′̸ = s there exists a finite sequence of actions that reaches any S = s′ from any 

S = s with non-zero probability. Therefore, for any S = s′ we can construct a tree of states by; i) starting with the root s′ and defining the set Z = S \ { s′}, ii) for each s′′ ∈ Z, if ∃ A = a′′ s.t. Ps′′ s′ (a′′ ) > 0 then s′′ is a parent of 

s′ in the tree and we remove s′′ from Z, iii) repeat for all parents of s′ and so on, until Z = ∅. As the cMDP is finite dimensional and irreducible, the resulting tree traverses the state space and is of finite depth, and by construction every state in the tree si has a single child sj and the tree contains no loops. For each si we can associate an action a(si) given by a(si) = arg max a Psisj (a). Consider the Markovian policy π(A = a | h = ( s0, a 0, . . . , s T ) = [ a = a(sT )] , which attempts to move from the most recent state sT to s′ by traversing the tree. For every state, there is a non-zero probability that π succeeds in traversing the tree to the root S = s′. If the agent fails a given transition St = si → St+1 = sj , the process of traversing the tree begins again from St+1 , and as the policy and environment are Markovian, each attempt to 13 General agents need world models 

traverse to S = s′ is independent. Hence, π attempts to reach S = s′ with an unbounded number of independent trials, each with non-zero probability of success, and hence eventually reaches S = s′ with probability 1. For s′ = s, the problem is identical except that the deterministic policy can take any action in S = s. Let S = s1 be the state that this transitions to. If s1 = s then the policy has reached S = s. If s1̸ = s we follow the deterministic Markovian policy derived in the previous section which eventually reaches S = s with probability 1. The following lemma allows us to simplify our analysis by letting us consider optimal policies in environments with extended action spaces, where determining optimal policies is easier. 

Lemma 2. Consider extending the action space of the environment cMDP with a single action A = ¯ a, A′ = A ∪ { ¯a}

where the extended transition function P ′ has P ′ 

> ss ′

(a) = Pss ′ (a) ∀ a̸ = ¯ a, and P ′ 

> ss ′

(¯ a) is any valid conditional probability distribution. For any given composite goal ψ the optimal policy for the extended action space A′ achieves ψ with a probability greater or equal to that for the optimal policy in the unextended action space A,

max  

> π

P ′(τ |= ψ | π, s 0) ≥ max  

> π

P (τ |= ψ | π, s 0)

Proof. Let P ′ 

> ss ′

(a) denote the new transition function in the extended environment. As P ′ 

> ss ′

(a) = Pss ′ (a) ∀ a̸ = ¯ a, the probability of any π that does not take action A = ¯ a satisfying any given composite goal ψ is the same in the extended and unextended environments. As the optimal policy π∗ 

> A

over A does not take action A = ¯ a (as ¯a̸ ∈ A), then 

P ′(τ |= ψ | π∗

> A

, s 0) = P (τ |= ψ | π∗

> A

, s 0) (6) Therefore there exists a policy for the extended action space (namely π∗

> A

) that achieves ψ with the same probability as the optimal policy for the unextended action space. Therefore, 

max  

> π

P ′(τ |= ψ | π, s 0) ≥ max  

> π

P (τ |= ψ | π, s 0) (7) We now derive Lemmas that let us factor and simplify sequential goals. 

Lemma 3. For ψ = ⟨φ1, . . . , φ L⟩ and a cMP obeying Assumption 1, if φ1 = ♢([ S = sg , A = ag ]) and π(at | ht) = 

π(at | st) is a stationary Markovian policy that eventually reaches S = sg and takes A = ag from S0 = s0 with probability 1, then, 

P (τ |= ⟨φ1, φ 2, . . . , φ L⟩ | π, s 0) = P (τ |= ⟨φ2, . . . , φ L⟩ | π, s g )

Proof. Using Def. 3 we can simplify ⟨φ1, φ 2, . . . , φ L⟩ = [ S̸ = sg ]U([ S = sg ] ∧ ⟨ φ2, . . . , φ L⟩). If s0 = sg then φ1 is satisfied at t = 0 and φ1 is trivialised, i.e. P (τ |= ⟨φ1, φ 2, . . . , φ L⟩ | π, s g ) = P (τ |= ⟨φ2, . . . , φ L⟩ | π, s g ). Therefore we need only consider the case where s0̸ = sg .As π reaches S = sg from S0 = s0 with probability 1, every trajectory generated by π eventually reaches S = sg by assumption, and at some T > 0 as s0̸ = sg . For a given τ let T be the time step that τ first reaches sg . Because π is deterministic and Markovian, and the environment is Markovian, then for s0̸ = sg we can express, 

P (τ | s0, π ) = 

> T

Y

> i=1

P (si | si−1, π ′(si−1)) P (τT +1 | ST = sg , π ′(St = sg )) (8) where π′ is the policy for t > 0, and as π′ is stationary we have that P (τT +1 | ST = sg , π ′(St = sg )) = P (τT +1 |

14 General agents need world models 

sg , π ′(sg )) . Let hT be the trajectory up to ST = sg . Using the LTL expression for ψ from Def. 6 gives, 

P (τ |= ⟨φ1, φ 2, . . . , φ L⟩ | π, s 0) = X

> hT

P (hT | s0, π ) X 

> τT+1

P (τT +1 | hT , π (hT )) I([ τ |= [ S̸ = sg ]U([ S = sg ] ∧ ⟨ φ2, . . . , φ L⟩)]) 

(9) (10) 

= X

> hT

P (hT | s0, π )I([ S̸ = sg ]U[S = sg ]) X 

> τT+1

P (τT +1 | hT , π (hT )) I([ τT |= ⟨φ2, . . . , φ L⟩]) 

(11) 

= X

> hT

P (hT | s0, π ) X 

> τT+1

P (τT +1 | sg , π (sg )) I([ τT |= ⟨φ2, . . . , φ L⟩]) (12) 

= X

> hT

P (hT | s0, π )P (τT +1 |= ⟨φ2, . . . , φ L⟩ | ST = sg , A t = π(sg )) (13) 

= P (τ |= ⟨φ2, . . . , φ L⟩ | sg , π )) (14) where in the last line we have used P 

> hT

P (hT | π, s 0) = 1 by assumption (as π reaches S = sg from S0 = s0 with probability 1). 

Lemma 4. For ψ = ⟨φ1, φ 2, φ 3, . . . , φ L⟩ and a cMP obeying Assumption 1, if φ1 = ⃝([ s ∈ g1]) and φ2 = ♢([ S =

sg , A = ag ]) and π is a deterministic, Markovian policy then 

P (τ |= ψ | s0, π ) = P (S1 ∈ g1 | s0, π )P (τ |= ⟨φ3, . . . , φ L⟩ | sg , π )

Proof. Using Def. 6 and τk = ( sk, a k, . . . ) we get, 

P (τ |= ψ | s0, π ) = X

> τ1

P (τ1 | s0, a 0 = π(s0)) I([ ⃝([ s ∈ g1] ∧ ⟨ φ2, . . . , φ L⟩)]) (15) 

= X

> τ1

P (τ1 | s0, a 0 = π(s0)) I([ s1 ∈ g1] ∧ [τ1 |= ⟨φ2, . . . , φ L⟩]) (16) 

= X

> s1

P (s1 | s0, a 0 = π(s0)) I([ s1 ∈ g1]) X

> τ2

P (τ2 | s0, a 0 = π(s0), s 1, a 1 = π(s1)) I([ τ1 |= ⟨φ2, . . . , φ L⟩]) 

(17) 

= X

> s1

P (s1 | s0, a 0 = π(s0)) I([ s1 ∈ g1]) X

> τ2

P (τ2 | s1, a 1 = π(s1)) I([ τ1 |= ⟨φ2, . . . , φ L⟩]) (18) 

= X

> s1

P (s1 | s0, a 0 = π(s0)) I([ s1 ∈ g1]) P (τ2 |= ⟨φ2, . . . , φ L⟩ | s1, a 1 = π(s1)) (19) 

= X

> s1

P (s1 | s0, a 0 = π(s0)) I([ s1 ∈ g1]) P (τ |= ⟨φ3, . . . , φ L⟩ | sg , π ) (20) 

= P (S1 ∈ g1 | s0, π )P (τ |= ⟨φ3, . . . , φ L⟩ | sg , π ) (21) where in line (20) we apply Lemma 3 

Lemma 5. For ψ = ⟨φ1, φ 2, . . . , φ L⟩ and a cMP obeying Assumption 1, if φ1 = ⊤([ A = a]) and π is a deterministic policy s.t. π(s0) = a then P (τ |= ψ | s0, π ) = P (τ |= ⟨φ2, . . . , φ L⟩ | s0, π )

Proof. This follows simply from Def. 6 and that the policy is deterministic, 

P (τ |= ψ | s0, π ) = X

> τ1

P (τ1 | s0, a 0 = π(s0)) I([ τ |= [ A0 = a] ∧ ⟨ φ2, . . . , φ N ⟩) (22) 

= X

> τ1

P (τ1 | s0, a 0 = a = π(s0)) I([ π(s0) = a]) I([ τ |= ⟨φ2, . . . , φ N ⟩) (23) 

= P (τ |= ⟨φ2, . . . , φ L⟩ | s0, π ) (24) 15 General agents need world models 

where τk = ( sk, a k, . . . ).We now derive a family of composite goals for which the optimal policy satisfies the goal with a probability given by the cumulative binomial distribution for which the probability parameters is a specific transition probability. 

Lemma 6. Let ψ(r, n ) be the composite goal which is the disjunction over all sequential goals of the form 

ψ = ⟨φ1, φ 2, φ 3, φ 2, φ 3, . . . φ 2, φ ′

> 3

| {z } 

> ntimes

⟩

where the agent i) takes action A = b, φ1 = [ A = b], and then transitions eventually to S = s and takes action A = a, φ2 = ♢([ S =

s, A = a]) ,ii) transitions next to a goal state which is either S = s′, φ3 = ⃝[S = s′], or S̸ = s′, φ′ 

> 3

= ⃝[S̸ = s′],iii) returns eventually to S = s and takes action A = a, φ2, and repeats the cycle ii)-iii) a total of n times, with the transition φ3 = [ S′ = s] occurring r times and the transition φ′ 

> 3

= [ S̸ = s′] occurring n − r times. For s̸ = s′, the optimal policy achieves this goal with probability, 

max  

> π

P (τ |= ψ(r, n ) | π, s 0) = n!(n − r)! r! Pss ′ (a)r (1 − Pss ′ (a)) n−r (25) 

Proof. Let ψ = W 

> i

ψi. Each ψi involves a specific ordering of the r sub-goals φ3 = [ S = s] and the n − r sub-goals 

φ′ 

> 3

= [ S̸ = s′], hence they are mutually exclusive, i.e. ∄τ such that [τ |= ψi] ∧ [τ |= ψj ] for any ψi, ψ j in the disjunction s.t. 

ψi̸ = ψj , and hence, 

P (τ |= ψ(r, n ) | π, s 0) = X

> i

P (τ |= ψi | π, s 0) (26) First we evaluate max π P (τ |= ψ(r, n ) | π, s 0) in the environment with the extended action space (Lemma 2) with 

A′ = A ∪ { ¯a}, P ′

> s′′ s

(¯ a) = 1 ∀ s′′ ∈ S and P ′ 

> ss ′

(a̸ = ¯ a) = Pss ′ (a). I.e. we extend with the action A = ¯ a which returns the agent to S = s from any state with probability 1. Note that until the agent has returned to S = s a total of n times, in order to satisfy any sequential goal ψi comprising the composite goal ψ(r, n ) the agent must take action A = b at t = 0 

and A = a when it is in S = s. The only freedom left to the agent is how it returns to S = s (to satisfy φ2) from whatever state it transitions to after taking A = a in S = s, and for the extended action space it can achieve this immediately with probability 1 simply by taking action A = ¯ a. Therefore, the following policy is optimal for satisfying ψ(n, r ) with the extended action space, 

¯π∗(A = a′ | h = ( s0, a 0, . . . , s t)) = 

(

I([ a′ = b]) , t = 0 

I([ a′ = a] ∧ [st = s]) + I([ a′ = ¯ a] ∧ [st̸ = s]) , t > 0 (27) i.e. the agent first takes action A = b (required to satisfy φ1), and from then on it takes action A = a in S = s (required for 

φ3 and φ′

> 3

) and A = ¯ a otherwise, which returns the agent immediately to S = s. Applying Lemma 5 and Lemma 3 allows us to eliminate the first φ1 and φ2, giving 

P ′(τ |= ψi | ¯π∗, s 0) = P ′(τ |= ⟨ φ2, φ 3, . . . , φ 2, φ ′

> 3

| {z }  

> r×φ2,φ 3and (n−r)×φ2,φ ′
> 3

⟩ | ¯π∗′ , s ) (28) where ¯π∗′ is ¯π∗ for t > 0, which we denote ¯π∗ from now on for ease of notation, and can treat ¯π∗ as a stationary policy. Repeatedly applying Lemma 4 to (28) gives, 

P ′(τ |= ψi | ¯π∗, s 0) = Pss ′ (a)r (1 − Pss ′ (a)) n−r (29) 16 General agents need world models 

Applying (26) and noting P ′(τ |= ψi | ¯π∗, s 0) = P ′(τ |= ψj | ¯π∗, s 0) for all i, j for ψ(r, n ) = W 

> i

ψi, and the total number of sequential goals comprising ψ(r, n ) is given by the number of combinations of size r from n objects ( n transitions, r of which are s → s′), and so we recover, 

max  

> π

P ′(τ |= ψ(r, n ) | π, s 0) = n!(n − r)! r! Pss ′ (a)r (1 − Pss ′ (a)) n−r (30) Finally, we construct a policy ˜π in the original (unextended) environment, and show that this saturating the upper bound in (30) and so by Lemma 2 is optimal, therefore Equation (25) holds. By Lemma 1 there exists a deterministic Markovian policy πs′ (a | s) that transitions eventually to S = s from any state with probability 1. Let, 

˜π(at | st) = 



I([ a′ = b]) , t = 0 

πs′ (a | st) , t > 0 and st̸ = sI([ a′ = a]) , t > 0 and st = s

(31) Note ˜π is identical to ¯π∗ except that instead of taking action A = ¯ a in S = s (as this action does not exist) the agent follows 

πs′ . As πs′ is deterministic, stationary and Markovian, and eventually reaches S = s with probability 1 from any S = s′, so we can apply Lemma 5 and Lemma 4 as before giving, 

P (τ |= ψi | ˜π, s 0) = Pss ′ (a)r (1 − Pss ′ (a)) n−r (32) which saturates the upper bound implied by (30) and Lemma 2, hence ˜π is optimal, and using nCr = n!/(( n − r)! r!) we recover (25). We are now in a position to prove our main theorem. 

Theorem 1. Let Pss ′ (a) = P (St+1 = s′ | At = a, S t = s) be the transition probabilities of an environment satisfying Assumption 1. Let π be a goal-conditioned agent (Def. 5) with a maximum failure rate δ for all goals ψ ∈ Ψn where Ψn is the set of all composite goals with maximum goal depth n > 1. π fully determines a model for the environment transition probabilities ˆPss ′ (a) with errors satisfying 

ˆPss ′ (a) − Pss ′ (a) ≤

s

2Pss ′ (a)(1 − Pss ′ (a)) (n − 1)(1 − δ)

for any n, δ , and for δ ≪ 1, n ≫ 1 the error scales as, 

ˆPss ′ (a) − Pss ′ (a) ∼ O  δ/ √n + O(1 /n )

Proof in Appendix A.6. Proof. Let ψa′ (k, n ) denote composite goal as in Lemma 6 which is a disjunction over all sequential goals of the form 

ψ = ⟨φ0, φ 1, φ 2, . . . φ 1, φ ′

> 2

| {z } 

> ntimes

⟩ (33) where the agent i) takes action A = a (φ0 = [ A = a]), and then transitions eventually to S = s and takes action A = a (φ1 = ♢([ S =

s, A = a]) ), ii) transitions next to a goal state which is either S = s′ (φ2 = ⃝[S = s′]) or S̸ = s′ (φ′ 

> 2

= ⃝[S̸ = s′]), iii) returns eventually to S = s and takes action A = a (φ1), and repeats the cycle ii)-iii) a total of n times, with the transition φ2 = ⃝[S′ = s] occurring r times and the transition φ′ 

> 2

= ⃝[S̸ = s′] occurring n − r times, for all r ≤ k.17 General agents need world models 

I.e. the agent’s goal is to first take action A = a and then to achieve the transition (a, s ) → s′ at most k times out of n

attempts. Note that n attempts corresponds to a goal depth of 2n + 1 .Consider the sequential goals ψb(k, n ) that is identical to ψa(k, n ) except that the first sub-goal i) takes action A = b instead of A = a at time t = 0 , and in iii) we have r > k instead of r ≤ k. I.e. the agents goal is to first take action A = b and then to achieve the transition (a, s ) → s′ more than k times out of n attempts. Consider the composite goal ψa,b (k, n ) = ψa(k, n ) ∨ ψb(k, n ) for any pair of action a, b such that a̸ = b (we assume there are at least two distinct action in Assumption 1). Note that ψa(k, n ) and ψb(k, n ) are mutually exclusive, τ |= ψa(k, n ) = ⇒ τ̸ |= ψb(k, n ) and vice versa, hence, 

P (τ |= ψa,b (k, n ) | π, s 0) = P (τ |= ψa(k, n ) | π, s 0) + P (τ |= ψb(k, n ) | π, s 0) (34) and for any π only one of the terms on the right hand side is non-zero. Hence we can evaluate max π P (τ |= ψa(k, n ) | π, s 0)

and max π P (τ |= ψb(k, n ) | π, s 0) separately. Consider a bounded goal-conditioned agent (Def. 5). As the policy is deterministic by assumption, the agent is can only choose one of two sub-goals to attempt to satisfy, ψa(k, n ) or ψb(k, n ), depending on its first action choice A0. If 

π(a0 | s0) = I([ a0 = a]) then the agent is pursuing ψa(k, n ). For ψa(k, n ) = W 

> i

ψi all ψi, ψ j are mutually exclusive for 

ψi̸ = ψj , τ |= ψi =⇒ τ̸ |= ψj and vice versa, and hence, 

P (τ |= ψa(k, n ) | π, s 0) = X

> i

P (τ |= ψi | π, s 0) (35) and by Lemma 6 the maximum probability that this goal can be satisfied is given by, 

max  

> π

P (τ |= ψa(k, n ) | π, s 0) = 

> k

X

> r=0

Pn(X = r) = Pn(X ≤ k) (36) where 

Pn(X = r) := n!(n − r)! r! Pss ′ (a)r (1 − Pss ′ (a)) n−r (37) is the binomial probability mass function and Pn(X ≤ k) is the cumulative distribution function. Likewise if π(a0 | s0) = I([ a0 = b]) the agent is pursuing ψb(k, n ), which can be achieved with a maximum probability, 

max  

> π

P (τ |= ψb(k, n ) | π, s 0) = 

> n

X

> r=k+1

Pn(X = k) = Pn(X > k ) (38) Finally if π(a0 | s0) = I([ a0 = a′]) where a′̸ ∈ { a, b } then the agent satisfies ψa,b (k, n ) with probability zero. By assumption the agent’s policy is deterministic, and max {Pn(X ≤ k), P n(X > k )} > 0, so for any n, k the agent must take action A = a or A = b at t = 0 . Therefore for any given n, k the agent’s policy π(a0 | s0; ψa,b (k, n )) selects either 

a0 = a or a0 = b, and the choice of A0 for a given k witnesses the following inequalities; 

π(a0 | s0; ψa,b (k, n )) = I([ a0 = a]) =⇒ Pn(X ≤ k) ≥ Pn(X > k )(1 − δ) (39) 

π(a0 | s0; ψa,b (k, n )) = I([ a0 = b]) =⇒ Pn(X > k ) ≥ Pn(X ≤ k)(1 − δ) (40) For ease of notation we denote Pss ′ (a) = p. The median of the binomial distribution X = m is an integer 0 ≤ m ≤ n

that satisfies np − 1 ≤ m ≤ np + 1 . The proof proceeds by incrementing k from 0 to n, increasing Pn(X ≤ k) while decreasing Pn(X > k ), and finding the smallest value k∗ such that Pn(X > k ∗ − 1) ≥ Pn(X ≤ k∗ − 1)(1 − δ) and 

Pn(X ≤ k∗) ≥ Pn(X > k ∗)(1 − δ). If the agent always chooses A0 = a we set k∗ = 0 , and if they always choose 

A0 = b we set k∗ = n. This will turn out to be equivalent to a sparsity bias in the procedure for estimating Pss ′ (a), as it will result in us treating any transition probability below a given threshold value as 0, or above a maximum value as 

1. Note that Pn(X > 0) = 1 , P n(X ≤ 0) = 0 , and Pn(X > n ) = 0 , P n(X ≤ n) = 1 , so for any δ < 1 there must 18 General agents need world models 

exist 0 ≤ k∗ ≤ n satisfying (39) and (40) . Using Pn(X > k ) = 1 − Pn(X ≤ k), Pn(X > k − 1) = Pn(X ≥ k) and 

Pn(X ≤ k − 1) = 1 − Pn(X ≥ k) these inequalities simplify to, 

P (X ≤ k∗) ≥ 1 − δ

2 − δ (41) 

P (X ≥ k∗) ≥ 1 − δ

2 − δ (42) Note that the median m satisfies Pn(X ≥ m) ≥ 1/2 and Pn(X ≤ m) ≥ 1/2, so for δ = 0 we will recover the median exactly, and δ > 0 constitutes a relaxation of the bounds on the median, which we will show results in k∗ that has a bounded distance from the mean np .We derive two bounds on k∗, first in the case where δ is small and n is large. To derive this first bound we use Berry-Esseen theorem, which allows us to bound the distance of the (normalised) cumulative binomial distribution from the cumulative normal distribution, 

Pn

X − np 

pnp (1 − p) ≤ k

!

− Φ( X ≤ k) ≤ ∆ (43) where Φ is the cumulative normal distribution and ∆ = Cρ/ √n where C is a constant satisfying C ≤ 0.4748 and 

ρ = (1 − 2p(1 − p)) /pp(1 − p). For simplicity we relax this upper bound by taking, 

∆ = 12pnp (1 − p) (44) which is larger than Cρ/ √n. Defining Y := ( X − np )/pnp (1 − p), and using Pn(Y ≥ k) = 1 − P (Y ≤ k − 1) , (42) and (41) become, 

Φ Y ≤ k∗ − np 

pnp (1 − p)

!

≥ 1 − δ

2 − δ − ∆ (45) 

Φ Y ≤ k∗ − np − 1

pnp (1 − p)

!

≤ 12 − δ + ∆ (46) (47) which can be rearranged to give, 

k∗ − np 

pnp (1 − p) ≥ Φ−1

 1 − δ

2 − δ − ∆



(48) 

k∗ − np − 1

pnp (1 − p) ≤ Φ−1

 12 − δ + ∆ 



(49) (50) For δ ≪ 1 and ∆ ≪ 1 we can approximate the right hand side of (48) and (49) using the Taylor expansion of Φ−1(y) at 

y = 1 /2,

Φ−1(Y = 12 + ϵ) = ϵ√2π + O(ϵ3) , ϵ ≪ 1 (51) which is a valid approximation when ϵ2 ≪ 1. We therefore recover the bounds, 

k∗ − 12 − np ≳ −p2πnp (1 − p)

 δ

4 + ∆ 



− 12 (52) 

k∗ − 12 − np ≲ p2πnp (1 − p)

 δ

4 + ∆ 



+ 12 (53) 19 General agents need world models 

Using ˆp = ( k∗ − 1/2) /n as our estimate of p therefore satisfies 

|ˆp − p| ≲

r 2πp (1 − p)

n

 δ

4 + ∆ 



+ 12n

= δ

r πp (1 − p)8n + 1

n

 12 + √2π



which is valid for δ2 ≪ 1 and ∆2 = 1 /(np (1 − p)) ≪ 1 i.e. np (1 − p) ≫ 1. We have therefore shown that in this regime the approximation errors scales as O(δ/ √n) + O(1 /n ).Finally, we derive an absolute error bound for the estimate ˆp that is valid for all values of p, n, δ . I.e. for δ̸ ≪ 1 and/or 

np (1 − p)̸ ≫ 1, k∗ can be relatively far from the median, and so we require a bound that is satisfied for the tails of the cumulative binomial distribution. To this end we apply the one-sided Chebyshev inequality, 

Pn(X ≥ μ + tσ ) ≤ 11 + t2 (54) where μ = np and σ = pnp (1 − p). Changing variables t = ( k∗ − np )/σ in (54) yields, 

P (X ≥ k∗) ≤ 11 + (k∗−np )2

> np (1 −p)

(55) which combined with (42) yields, 

|k∗ − np | ≤ 

r np (1 − p)1 − δ (56) Using ˆp := k∗/n as our estimate of the transition probability gives, 

|ˆp − p| ≤ 

s

p(1 − p)

n(1 − δ) (57) Finally, as attempting the transition n times corresponds to a goal depth of 2n + 1 , we arrive at our final expression. Note that the bound in Theorem 1 asserts that we can identify p ∈ { 0, 1} with perfect precision. While this appears surprising at first, note that the sparsity constraint we previously enforced when selecting k∗ means that we estimate all sufficiently small p as ˆPss ′ (a) = 0 and similar for ˆPss ′ (a) = 1 , hence for deterministic transition probabilities we do recover the exact value. This is also intuitive from the definition of the bounded goal-conditioned agent Def. 5, as for any 

δ < 1 the agent will never choose sub-goal ψa if Pss ′ (a) = 0 , and hence any such transition will always be assigned k∗ = 0 

which yields an estimate ˆPss ′ (a) = 0 .

# B. Proof of Theorem 2 

Theorem 2. Let the set of myopic goals Ψmyopic be the subset of depth-1 composite goals Ψ1 such that the goal state(s) must be attained immediately after the agents first action, φ = ⃝[( s, a ) ∈ g]. We define an optimal myopic agent as a policy 

π∗(at | ht, ψ ) that is optimal for all ψ ∈ Ψmyopic . For an environment satisfying Assumption 1, any bounds on the transition probabilities | ˆPss ′ (a) − Pss ′ (a)| ≤ ϵ than can be determined from π∗ are trivial ( ϵ = 1 ) and tight. Proof in Appendix B. Proof. We will prove this by contradiction, determining partial information of the environment transition function that is sufficient to construct an optimal myopic agent, and showing that this partial information is insufficient to bound the transition probabilities (the trivial bound is tight). Hence, there can exist no procedure that bounds the transition probabilities given this partial information, and so no procedure that does so given the optimal myopic policy. Any ψ ∈ Ψmyopic is of the form φ1 ∨ φ1 ∨ . . . ∨ φk where φi = ⃝([( s, a ) ∈ gi). Using the transitivity of the Next operator, this can be simplified to ψ = ⃝([( s, a ) ∈ g1] ∨ . . . ∨ [( s, a ) ∈ gk]) , and using y = g1 ∪ g2 ∪ . . . ∪ gk we get 20 General agents need world models 

ψ = [( s1, a 1) ∈ y] where Y ⊆ S is some arbitrary subset of S. For A0 = a the probability that ψ is satisfied is given by 

P (τ |= ψ | π, s 0) = P (s1 ∈ y | a, s 0). The optimal agent therefore returns an action 

π∗(a0 | s0; ψ) = arg max 

> a

P (s1 ∈ y | a, s 0) (58) Let a∗(s0, y) := arg max 

> a

P (s1 ∈ y | a, s 0). We can construct an optimal policy π∗(a0 | s0; ψ) given A∗ =

{a∗(s0, y) | s0, Y ⊆ S, Y = y} as π∗(a0 | s0; ψ) = I([ a0 = a∗(s0, y)]) . Next, we show that the set of transition functions that are compatible with any given A∗ includes all values of Pss ′ (a) ∈ [0 , 1] for any given transition, and so A∗

does not partially identify Pss ′ (a). This can be seen simply by choosing Pss ′ (a) = Pss ′ (i.e. the transition probabilities are the same for all actions). For any choice of Pss ′ ∈ [0 , 1] , such a transition function is compatible with all possible 

A∗. Hence, for any given A∗ the set of compatible values of Pss ′ (a) is [0 , 1] , and knowing A∗ provides no bound on the possible values of any given transition probability Pss ′ (a) (i.e. partial identification is impossible (Bellot, 2023)). Hence, as 

π∗ is a function of A∗, π∗ can provide no non-trivial bound on Pss ′ (a).21 General agents need world models 

# C. Algorithms 

First we present the pseudocode for the procedure Algorithm 1 used in the proof of Theorem 1 to derive error-bounded estimates of the transition probabilities ˆPss ′ (a) given the regret-bounded goal-conditioned policy π(at | ht; ψ). We then present Algorithm 2 an alternative algorithm for estimating ˆPss ′ (a) which has weaker errors bounds than Algorithm 1 but significantly simplified implementation. Note that in both Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 we employ a linear search of k, but we can greatly reduce the complexity in practice e.g. by performing a binary search over k ∈ [0 , n ]. We use Algorithm 2 to generate our experimental results in Section 3.1 and Appendix D. Note that by looping over all transitions (s, a, s ′) and applying Algorithm 1 we can recover the full transition function. 

Algorithm 1 Estimate Transition Probability ˆPss ′ (a) from Policy π

Require: Goal-conditioned policy π(at|ht; ψ)

Require: Choice of state s, action a, outcome s′

Require: Precision parameter n ∈ N (related to maximum goal depth 2n + 1 )

Require: An alternative action b̸ = a

1: function ESTIMATE TRANSITION PROBABILITY (π, s, a, s ′, n, b )

2: Initialize k∗ ← n

3: for k = 1 to n do 

4: Define base LTL components: 

5: φ0 ← [A0 = a]

6: ▷ Take action a ◁

7: φ′ 

> 0

← [A0 = b]

8: ▷ Take action b ◁

9: φ1 ← ♢[A = a, S = s]

10: ▷ Transitions eventually to state s and takes action a ◁

11: φ2 ← ⃝ [S = s′]

12: ▷ Transition Next to state s′ ◁

13: φ′ 

> 2

← ⃝ [S̸ = s′]

14: ▷ Transition Next to any state other than s′ ◁

15: Define composite goal: 

16: ψ0 ← ⟨ φ1, φ ′

> 2

⟩

17: ▷ Sequential goal labelled Fail ◁

18: ψ1 ← ⟨ φ1, φ 2⟩

19: ▷ Sequential goal labelled Success ◁

20: ψa(k, n ) ← W  

> sequences with r≤ksuccesses

⟨φ0, (ψ0 or ψ1)×n⟩

21: ψb(k, n ) ← W  

> sequences with r>k successes

⟨φ′

> 0

, (ψ0 or ψ1)×n⟩

22: ▷ LTL expressions calculated with Def. 6 ◁

23: ψa,b (k, n ) ← ψa(k, n ) ∨ ψb(k, n )

24: a0 ← π(a0|s0; ψa,b (k, n )) 

25: ▷ Query the policy for the first action ◁

26: if a0 = a then 

27: k∗ ← k

28: break 

29: ▷ Found smallest k s.t. where agent prefers goal involving ≤ k successes ◁

30: Estimate ˆPss ′ (a) ← (k∗ − 1/2) /n 

31: return ˆPss ′ (a)

Algorithm 2 requires the agent to generalize to simpler sequential goals than Algorithm 1. 22 General agents need world models 

Algorithm 2 Simplified method for estimating Transition Probability ˆPss ′ (a) from Policy π with weaker error bounds than Algorithm 1 

Require: Goal-conditioned policy π(at|ht; ψ)

Require: Choice of state s, action a, outcome s′

Require: Precision parameter n ∈ N (related to maximum goal depth 2n + 1 )

Require: An alternative action b̸ = a

1: function ESTIMATE TRANSITION PROBABILITY (π, s, a, s ′, n, b )

2: Define base LTL components: 

3: φ0 ← [A0 = a]

4: ▷ Take action a ◁

5: φ′ 

> 0

← [A0 = b]

6: ▷ Take action b ◁

7: φ1 ← ♢[A = a, S = s]

8: ▷ Transitions eventually to state s and takes action a ◁

9: φ2 ← ⃝ [S = s′]

10: ▷ Transition Next to state s′ ◁

11: φ′ 

> 2

← ⃝ [S̸ = s′]

12: ▷ Transition Next to any state other than s′ ◁

13: Define sequential goals: 

14: ψa ← ⟨ φ0, φ 1, φ 2⟩

15: ψb ← ⟨ φ0, φ 1, φ ′

> 2

⟩

16: ψa,b = ψa ∨ ψb

17: a0 ← π(a0|s0; ψa,b )

18: ▷ Query the policy for the first action ◁

19: if a0 = a then 

20: ▷ Witnessing Pss ′ (a) ≥ (1 − Pss ′ (a))(1 − δ) ◁

21: ψa ← ⟨ φ0, (ψ1, ψ 2)×n⟩

22: ψb(k) ← ⟨ φ0, (ψ1, ψ ′

> 2

)×k⟩

23: for k = 1 to n do 

24: ψa,b (k) ← ψa ∨ ψb(k)

25: a0 ← π(a0|s0; ψa,b (k)) 

26: ▷ Query the policy for the first action ◁

27: if a0 = a then 

28: k∗ ← k

29: break 

30: Estimate ˆPss ′ (a) ← Solve (P n = (1 − P )k∗−1/2)

31: return ˆPss ′ (a)

32: else 

33: ψb ← ⟨ φ0, (ψ1, ψ ′

> 2

)×n⟩

34: ψa(k) ← ⟨ φ0, (ψ1, ψ 2)×k⟩

35: for k = 1 to n do 

36: ψa,b (k) ← ψa(k) ∨ ψb

37: a0 ← π(a0|s0; ψa,b (k)) 

38: ▷ Query the policy for the first action ◁

39: if a0 = b then 

40: k∗ ← k

41: break 

42: Estimate ˆPss ′ (a) ← Solve (P k∗−1/2 = (1 − P )n)

43: return ˆPss ′ (a)

23 General agents need world models 

# D. Experiments 

Here we detail the experiment setup including the environment, agent and results. 

Environment. Our environment is a cMP Def. 1 comprising of 20 states and 5 actions, and satisfying Assumption 1. It has a randomly generated transition function with a sparsity constraint such that each state-action pair has at most 5 outcomes that occur with non-zero probability, so as to ensure that navigating eventually to a given goal-state is non-trivial (e.g. is not achieved by all deterministic policies). 

Agent. The agent is model based, with the model learned from experienced generated by sampling state-action trajectories from the environment under the maximally random policy of a given number of time steps Nsamples ∈{500 , 1000 , 2000 , 3000 , 4000 , 5000 , 6000 , 7000 , 8000 , 9000 , 10 , 000 }. Note that Algorithm 2 does not have access to the agents internal world model (the algorithm takes as input only the agent’s policy). Algorithm 2 queries the agent with different composite goals of the form ψa,b (n, m ), and the agent determines the optimal policy with respect to its world model, which corresponds to 1) at t = 0 taking action A = a if the agent believes Pss ′ (a)n > (1 − Pss ′ (a)) m else A = b

2) identifying a deterministic policy that eventually reaches the target state S = s from any other state, and taking action 

A = a in S = s.

Experimental setup. We train 10 agents for each sample size Nsamples , with a different random seed for the experience trajectories, and take the average of the experimental results over the set of agents with the same sample size. For each agent we run Algorithm 2 for different max goal depths N ∈ { 10 , 20 , 50 , 75 , 100 , 200 , 300 , 400 , 500 , 600 }, and record the regret δ for each input goal, which is 1 − P (τ |= ψn,m | π)/P (τ |= ψn,m | π∗) where P (τ |= ψn,m | π) is the probability the agent achieves the goal agent’s policy and P (τ |= ψn,m | π∗) is the probability that the optimal policy achieves the goal. We then calculate the average regret ⟨δ⟩ all goals the agent is queried with by Algorithm 2, and the average error ⟨ϵ⟩

(averaged over all state-action-outcome tuples) for the estimated transition function returned by Algorithm 2. We determine 

Nmax (⟨δ⟩ = k) through least-squares regression of N (goal depth) v.s. ⟨δ⟩ for a given agent. 

Results. 

Table 1: Mean Error and Standard Deviation for Different Nsamples and Ndepth Values                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

> Ndepth Nsamples
> 500 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000 10 0.171 ±0.007 0.137 ±0.008 0.111 ±0.009 0.097 ±0.006 0.088 ±0.005 0.082 ±0.003 0.078 ±0.003 0.076 ±0.004 0.075 ±0.004 0.072 ±0.005 0.066 ±0.005 20 0.160 ±0.008 0.118 ±0.008 0.088 ±0.005 0.073 ±0.004 0.064 ±0.002 0.059 ±0.003 0.054 ±0.003 0.052 ±0.003 0.049 ±0.003 0.047 ±0.002 0.044 ±0.003 50 0.157 ±0.008 0.108 ±0.008 0.077 ±0.005 0.063 ±0.003 0.054 ±0.003 0.048 ±0.003 0.044 ±0.003 0.041 ±0.003 0.039 ±0.003 0.037 ±0.002 0.034 ±0.002 75 0.157 ±0.008 0.107 ±0.008 0.075 ±0.005 0.061 ±0.003 0.052 ±0.003 0.047 ±0.002 0.042 ±0.002 0.040 ±0.003 0.038 ±0.003 0.035 ±0.002 0.033 ±0.002 100 0.156 ±0.008 0.106 ±0.008 0.074 ±0.004 0.060 ±0.003 0.051 ±0.002 0.046 ±0.002 0.041 ±0.002 0.039 ±0.003 0.037 ±0.003 0.034 ±0.002 0.032 ±0.002 200 0.155 ±0.008 0.105 ±0.007 0.073 ±0.004 0.059 ±0.003 0.050 ±0.002 0.045 ±0.002 0.040 ±0.002 0.038 ±0.003 0.036 ±0.003 0.034 ±0.002 0.031 ±0.002 300 0.155 ±0.008 0.104 ±0.007 0.072 ±0.004 0.058 ±0.003 0.049 ±0.002 0.044 ±0.002 0.040 ±0.002 0.038 ±0.003 0.036 ±0.003 0.033 ±0.002 0.031 ±0.002 400 0.155 ±0.008 0.104 ±0.007 0.072 ±0.004 0.058 ±0.003 0.049 ±0.002 0.044 ±0.002 0.040 ±0.002 0.038 ±0.003 0.035 ±0.003 0.033 ±0.002 0.031 ±0.002 500 0.155 ±0.008 0.104 ±0.007 0.072 ±0.004 0.058 ±0.003 0.049 ±0.002 0.044 ±0.002 0.040 ±0.002 0.037 ±0.003 0.035 ±0.003 0.033 ±0.002 0.031 ±0.002 600 0.155 ±0.008 0.104 ±0.007 0.072 ±0.004 0.058 ±0.003 0.049 ±0.002 0.044 ±0.002 0.040 ±0.002 0.037 ±0.003 0.035 ±0.003 0.034 ±0.002 0.031 ±0.002

# References 

Abdou, M., Kulmizev, A., Hershcovich, D., Frank, S., Pavlick, E., and Søgaard, A. Can language models encode perceptual structure without grounding? a case study in color. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.06129 , 2021. Abramson, J., Adler, J., Dunger, J., Evans, R., Green, T., Pritzel, A., Ronneberger, O., Willmore, L., Ballard, A. J., Bambrick, J., et al. Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with alphafold 3. Nature , 630(8016):493–500, 2024. Alain, G. and Bengio, Y. Understanding intermediate layers using linear classifier probes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.01644 ,2016. Allers, R. Microcosmus: From anaximandros to paracelsus. Traditio , pp. 319–407, 1944. Amin, K. and Singh, S. Towards resolving unidentifiability in inverse reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.06569 , 2016. Amodei, D., Olah, C., Steinhardt, J., Christiano, P., Schulman, J., and Man ´e, D. Concrete problems in ai safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565 , 2016. 24 General agents need world models 

Armstrong, S. and O’Rorke, X. Good and safe uses of ai oracles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05541 , 2017. ˚Astr ¨om, K. J. and Murray, R. Feedback systems: an introduction for scientists and engineers . Princeton university press, 2021. Baier, C. and Katoen, J.-P. Principles of model checking . MIT press, 2008. Baker, C. L., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Saxe, R. R. Goal inference as inverse planning. In Proceedings of the annual meeting of the cognitive science society , volume 29, 2007. Bareinboim, E., Correa, J. D., Ibeling, D., and Icard, T. On pearl’s hierarchy and the foundations of causal inference. In 

Probabilistic and causal inference: the works of judea pearl , pp. 507–556. 2022. Bellot, A. Towards bounding causal effects under markov equivalence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07259 , 2023. Bengio, Y., Cohen, M. K., Malkin, N., MacDermott, M., Fornasiere, D., Greiner, P., and Kaddar, Y. Can a bayesian oracle prevent harm from an agent? arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05284 , 2024. Bengio, Y., Cohen, M., Fornasiere, D., Ghosn, J., Greiner, P., MacDermott, M., Mindermann, S., Oberman, A., Richardson, J., Richardson, O., et al. Superintelligent agents pose catastrophic risks: Can scientist ai offer a safer path? arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.15657 , 2025. Black, K., Brown, N., Driess, D., Esmail, A., Equi, M., Finn, C., Fusai, N., Groom, L., Hausman, K., Ichter, B., et al. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 , 2024. Box, G. E. and Draper, N. R. Empirical model-building and response surfaces. John Wiley & Sons, 1987. Bratman, M. Intention, plans, and practical reason, 1987. Bricken, T., Templeton, A., Batson, J., Chen, B., Jermyn, A., Conerly, T., Turner, N., Anil, C., Denison, C., Askell, A., et al. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language models with dictionary learning. Transformer Circuits Thread , 2, 2023. Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Chen, X., Choromanski, K., Ding, T., Driess, D., Dubey, A., Finn, C., et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818 , 2023. Brooks, R. A. Intelligence without representation. Artificial intelligence , 47(1-3):139–159, 1991. Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020. Brunke, L., Greeff, M., Hall, A. W., Yuan, Z., Zhou, S., Panerati, J., and Schoellig, A. P. Safe learning in robotics: From learning-based control to safe reinforcement learning. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems , 5 (1):411–444, 2022. Bush, T., Chung, S., Anwar, U., Garriga-Alonso, A., and Krueger, D. Interpreting emergent planning in model-free reinforcement learning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Camacho, A., Icarte, R. T., Klassen, T. Q., Valenzano, R. A., and McIlraith, S. A. Ltl and beyond: Formal languages for reward function specification in reinforcement learning. In IJCAI , volume 19, pp. 6065–6073, 2019. Chockler, H. and Halpern, J. Y. Responsibility and blame: A structural-model approach. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 22:93–115, 2004. Christiano, P., Cotra, A., and Xu, M. Eliciting latent knowledge: How to tell if your eyes deceive you. Technical report, Alignment Research Center , 2021. Chua, K., Calandra, R., McAllister, R., and Levine, S. Deep reinforcement learning in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. Conant, R. C. and Ross Ashby, W. Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that system. International journal of systems science , 1(2):89–97, 1970. 25 General agents need world models 

Dalrymple, D., Skalse, J., Bengio, Y., Russell, S., Tegmark, M., Seshia, S., Omohundro, S., Szegedy, C., Goldhaber, B., Ammann, N., et al. Towards guaranteed safe ai: A framework for ensuring robust and reliable ai systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06624 , 2024. Demri, S. and Schnoebelen, P. The complexity of propositional linear temporal logics in simple cases. Information and Computation , 174(1):84–103, 2002. Ding, X., Smith, S. L., Belta, C., and Rus, D. Optimal control of markov decision processes with linear temporal logic constraints. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 59(5):1244–1257, 2014. Driess, D., Xia, F., Sajjadi, M. S., Lynch, C., Chowdhery, A., Ichter, B., Wahid, A., Tompson, J., Vuong, Q., Yu, T., et al. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language model. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 8469–8488. PMLR, 2023. Dulac-Arnold, G., Mankowitz, D., and Hester, T. Challenges of real-world reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12901 , 2019. Dunbar, R. I. The social brain hypothesis. Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews: Issues, News, and Reviews , 6(5):178–190, 1998. Dzifcak, J., Scheutz, M., Baral, C., and Schermerhorn, P. What to do and how to do it: Translating natural language directives into temporal and dynamic logic representation for goal management and action execution. In 2009 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , pp. 4163–4168. IEEE, 2009. Fagin, R., Halpern, J. Y., Moses, Y., and Vardi, M. Reasoning about knowledge . MIT press, 2004. Farquhar, S., Carey, R., and Everitt, T. Path-specific objectives for safer agent incentives. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 36, pp. 9529–9538, 2022. Farquhar, S., Varma, V., Lindner, D., Elson, D., Biddulph, C., Goodfellow, I., and Shah, R. Mona: Myopic optimization with non-myopic approval can mitigate multi-step reward hacking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13011 , 2025. Friston, K. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature reviews neuroscience , 11(2):127–138, 2010. Friston, K. Active inference and free energy. Behavioral and brain sciences , 36(3):212, 2013. Ghallab, M., Nau, D., and Traverso, P. Automated Planning: theory and practice . Elsevier, 2004. Glanois, C., Weng, P., Zimmer, M., Li, D., Yang, T., Hao, J., and Liu, W. A survey on interpretable reinforcement learning. 

Machine Learning , 113(8):5847–5890, 2024. Gregory, R. L. Perceptions as hypotheses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. B, Biological Sciences , 290(1038):181–197, 1980. Gurnee, W. and Tegmark, M. Language models represent space and time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02207 , 2023a. Gurnee, W. and Tegmark, M. Language models represent space and time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02207 , 2023b. Ha, D. and Schmidhuber, J. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122 , 2018. Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Fischer, I., Villegas, R., Ha, D., Lee, H., and Davidson, J. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 2555–2565. PMLR, 2019. Hafner, D., Pasukonis, J., Ba, J., and Lillicrap, T. Mastering diverse domains through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104 , 2023. Halpern, J. Y. and Piermont, E. Subjective causality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10937 , 2024. Hao, S., Gu, Y., Ma, H., Hong, J. J., Wang, Z., Wang, D. Z., and Hu, Z. Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14992 , 2023. 26 General agents need world models 

Hasanbeig, M., Kantaros, Y., Abate, A., Kroening, D., Pappas, G. J., and Lee, I. Reinforcement learning for temporal logic control synthesis with probabilistic satisfaction guarantees. In 2019 IEEE 58th conference on decision and control (CDC) ,pp. 5338–5343. IEEE, 2019. Hills, T. T., Todd, P. M., Lazer, D., Redish, A. D., and Couzin, I. D. Exploration versus exploitation in space, mind, and society. Trends in cognitive sciences , 19(1):46–54, 2015. Hou, Y., Li, J., Fei, Y., Stolfo, A., Zhou, W., Zeng, G., Bosselut, A., and Sachan, M. Towards a mechanistic interpretation of multi-step reasoning capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14491 , 2023. Huang, Q. Model-based or model-free, a review of approaches in reinforcement learning. In 2020 International Conference on Computing and Data Science (CDS) , pp. 219–221. IEEE, 2020. Jackermeier, M. and Abate, A. Deepltl: Learning to efficiently satisfy complex ltl specifications. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) 2025 , 2024. Jackermeier, M. and Abate, A. Deepltl: Learning to efficiently satisfy complex ltl specifications for multi-task rl. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Johnson-Laird, P. N. Mental models: Towards a cognitive science of language, inference, and consciousness . Number 6. Harvard University Press, 1983. Kahneman, D. Thinking, fast and slow . macmillan, 2011. Karvonen, A. Emergent world models and latent variable estimation in chess-playing language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.15498 , 2024. Kuo, Y.-L., Katz, B., and Barbu, A. Encoding formulas as deep networks: Reinforcement learning for zero-shot execution of ltl formulas. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 5604–5610. IEEE, 2020. Lake, B. M., Ullman, T. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Gershman, S. J. Building machines that learn and think like people. 

Behavioral and brain sciences , 40:e253, 2017. LeCun, Y. A path towards autonomous machine intelligence version 0.9. 2, 2022-06-27. Open Review , 62(1):1–62, 2022. Leike, J., Krueger, D., Everitt, T., Martic, M., Maini, V., and Legg, S. Scalable agent alignment via reward modeling: a research direction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.07871 , 2018. Li, K., Hopkins, A. K., Bau, D., Vi ´egas, F., Pfister, H., and Wattenberg, M. Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic task. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13382 , 2022. Li, X., Vasile, C.-I., and Belta, C. Reinforcement learning with temporal logic rewards. In 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 3834–3839. IEEE, 2017. Littman, M. L., Topcu, U., Fu, J., Isbell, C., Wen, M., and MacGlashan, J. Environment-independent task specifications via gltl. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04341 , 2017. Liu, M., Zhu, M., and Zhang, W. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning: Problems and solutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08299 , 2022. Locke, E. A. and Latham, G. P. Goal setting theory, 1990. 2013. Lockwood, O. and Si, M. A review of uncertainty for deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment , volume 18, pp. 155–162, 2022. Merchant, A., Batzner, S., Schoenholz, S. S., Aykol, M., Cheon, G., and Cubuk, E. D. Scaling deep learning for materials discovery. Nature , 624(7990):80–85, 2023. Ng, A. Y., Russell, S., et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Icml , volume 1, pp. 2, 2000. 27 General agents need world models 

Pearl, J. Theoretical impediments to machine learning with seven sparks from the causal revolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.04016 , 2018. Pnueli, A. The temporal logic of programs. In 18th annual symposium on foundations of computer science (sfcs 1977) , pp. 46–57. ieee, 1977. Puterman, M. L. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming . John Wiley & Sons, 2014. Qiu, W., Mao, W., and Zhu, H. Instructing goal-conditioned reinforcement learning agents with temporal logic objectives. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:39147–39175, 2023. Qiu, W., Mao, W., and Zhu, H. Instructing goal-conditioned reinforcement learning agents with temporal logic objectives. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024. Raad, M. A., Ahuja, A., Barros, C., Besse, F., Bolt, A., Bolton, A., Brownfield, B., Buttimore, G., Cant, M., Chakera, S., et al. Scaling instructable agents across many simulated worlds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10179 , 2024. Rabinowitz, N., Perbet, F., Song, F., Zhang, C., Eslami, S. A., and Botvinick, M. Machine theory of mind. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 4218–4227. PMLR, 2018. Racani` ere, S., Weber, T., Reichert, D., Buesing, L., Guez, A., Jimenez Rezende, D., Puigdom` enech Badia, A., Vinyals, O., Heess, N., Li, Y., et al. Imagination-augmented agents for deep reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Raman, N., Lundy, T., Amouyal, S., Levine, Y., Leyton-Brown, K., and Tennenholtz, M. Steer: Assessing the economic rationality of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09552 , 2024a. Raman, N. K., Lundy, T., Amouyal, S. J., Levine, Y., Leyton-Brown, K., and Tennenholtz, M. Steer: Assessing the economic rationality of large language models. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024b. Reed, S., Zolna, K., Parisotto, E., Colmenarejo, S. G., Novikov, A., Barth-Maron, G., Gimenez, M., Sulsky, Y., Kay, J., Springenberg, J. T., et al. A generalist agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175 , 2022. Richens, J. and Everitt, T. Robust agents learn causal world models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Richens, J., Beard, R., and Thompson, D. H. Counterfactual harm. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35: 36350–36365, 2022. Safron, A. An integrated world modeling theory (iwmt) of consciousness: combining integrated information and global neuronal workspace theories with the free energy principle and active inference framework; toward solving the hard problem and characterizing agentic causation. Frontiers in artificial intelligence , 3:520574, 2020. Savage, L. J. The foundations of statistics . Courier Corporation, 1972. Schaul, T., Horgan, D., Gregor, K., and Silver, D. Universal value function approximators. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 1312–1320. PMLR, 2015. Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Hubert, T., Simonyan, K., Sifre, L., Schmitt, S., Guez, A., Lockhart, E., Hassabis, D., Graepel, T., et al. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature , 588(7839):604–609, 2020. Shepard, R. N. Toward a universal law of generalization for psychological science. Science , 237(4820):1317–1323, 1987. Sutton, R. S. Reinforcement learning: an introduction. A Bradford Book , 2018. Tomasello, M. The evolution of agency: Behavioral organization from lizards to humans . MIT Press, 2022. Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases: Biases in judgments reveal some heuristics of thinking under uncertainty. science , 185(4157):1124–1131, 1974. 28 General agents need world models 

Vaezipoor, P., Li, A. C., Icarte, R. A. T., and Mcilraith, S. A. Ltl2action: Generalizing ltl instructions for multi-task rl. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 10497–10508. PMLR, 2021. Von Neumann, J. and Morgenstern, O. Theory of games and economic behavior: 60th anniversary commemorative edition. In Theory of games and economic behavior . Princeton university press, 2007. Wang, G., Xie, Y., Jiang, Y., Mandlekar, A., Xiao, C., Zhu, Y., Fan, L., and Anandkumar, A. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 , 2023. Ward, F., Toni, F., Belardinelli, F., and Everitt, T. Honesty is the best policy: defining and mitigating ai deception. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:2313–2341, 2023. Ward, F. R., MacDermott, M., Belardinelli, F., Toni, F., and Everitt, T. The reasons that agents act: Intention and instrumental goals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07221 , 2024. Wentworth, J. Fixing the good regulator theorem. https://www .alignmentforum .org/posts/ Dx9LoqsEh3gHNJMDk/fixing-the-good-regulator-theorem , 2021. Accessed: 2023-10-17. Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K., and Cao, Y. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 , 2022. Zhu, Z., Lin, K., Jain, A. K., and Zhou, J. Transfer learning in deep reinforcement learning: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2023. 29