Title: SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=lZ4HiOwpBO

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables 

Ayushi Mishra * 1 Yang Bai * 1 Priyadarshan Narayanasamy 1 Nakul Garg 1 Nirupam Roy 1

# Abstract 

Integrating spatial context into large language models (LLMs) has the potential to revolutionize human-computer interaction, particularly in wear-able devices. In this work, we present a novel sys-tem architecture that incorporates spatial speech understanding into LLMs, enabling contextually aware and adaptive applications for wearable tech-nologies. Our approach leverages microstructure-based spatial sensing to extract precise Direction of Arrival (DoA) information using a monau-ral microphone. To address the lack of existing dataset for microstructure-assisted speech record-ings, we synthetically create a dataset by using the LibriSpeech dataset. This spatial information is fused with linguistic embeddings from Ope-nAI’s Whisper model, allowing each modality to learn complementary contextual representations. The fused embeddings are aligned with the input space of LLaMA-3.2 3B model and fine-tuned with lightweight adaptation technique LoRA to optimize for on-device processing. SING sup-ports spatially-aware automatic speech recogni-tion (ASR), achieving a mean error of 25.72°—a substantial improvement compared to the 88.52° median error in existing work—with a word error rate (WER) of 5.3. SING also supports sound-scaping, for example, inference how many people were talking and their directions, with up to 5 people and a median DoA error of 16°. Our sys-tem demonstrates superior performance in spatial speech understanding while addressing the chal-lenges of power efficiency, privacy, and hardware constraints, paving the way for advanced appli-cations in augmented reality, accessibility, and immersive experiences.      

> *Equal contribution 1Department of Computer Science, Univer-sity of Maryland, College Park, USA. Correspondence to: Nirupam Roy <niruroy@umd.edu >.
> Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada, PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).

# 1. Introduction 

■ Vision. Large language models (LLMs) have created new possibilities by enabling intuitive, contextual, and natural in-teractions with machine (Choi & Li, 2024; Cui et al., 2024; Kumaran et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Alayrac et al., 2022). Introduction of this capability to smart earbuds and other wearables is around the corner (FusionChat, 2025). Spatial understanding of speech in LLMs can open up a frontier for wearable applications, as it enables such ubiquitous devices to process directional cues, recognize speech from multiple sources, and associate spoken content to its spatial context. This capability can be a cornerstone in significantly enhanc-ing user experiences by making devices more responsive, intuitive, and context-aware, particularly in applications like virtual assistants, augmented reality (AR), and acces-sibility tools. By enabling LLMs to reason about spatial acoustic cues, wearables can offer advanced features such as selective voice summarization in meetings (Ma et al., 2025; Kumar & Kabiri, 2022), sound-based navigation for visually impaired individuals (Chen et al., 2020; Gan et al., 2020), and immersive XR experiences that react dynamically to the user’s surroundings (Parkkola, 2023; Kailas & Tiwari, 2021). Spatial context is yet to be explored to its full potential with LLMs. BAT (Zheng et al., 2024) is one of the first to support spatial understanding for LLM. While inspiring, BAT supports inference only on non-verbal audio, such as dog barking or bird chirping, without the context of spoken language. In this paper, we aim to advance the idea of introducing spatial knowledge in LLMs for speech signals and at the same time make it more compatible for wearables and ubiquitous computing devices. This work strive to achieve high accuracy of directional audio sensing using a novel monaural setup and extending its capability to spatial speech processing. 

■ Challenges and Our Approach. 

While promising, realization of this vision needs to over-come several unique challenges. 

A. Spatial cues in wearables. Sensing spatial features of sound, such as direction-of-arrival (DoA) or source lo-cation, requires sampling the wave in space using an array of microphones. However, traditional methods are limited by space-time sampling constraints and requires large and 1SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables 

power hungry microphone arrays (Yang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023) to achieve resolution of spatial cues essential for understanding acoustic physical contexts. These arrays require significant physical space, making them impractical for any miniature wearables and ubiquitous devices such as microscale Internet of Things (IoT) sensors or button-sized wearables. BAT (Zheng et al., 2024) achieves spatial under-standing using monaural or binaural microphones. While claimed monaural, the mean error rate (MAE) is 88.52°, too high for real-world applications. In a meeting scenario, an error of 88.52° would result in attributing spoken content to the wrong person sitting across the table, severely degrading the reliability of voice-based summarization features in AR glasses or virtual assistants. In smart home systems, identifying which room or device a user is speaking from (e.g., turning toward a speaker to answer a question) would fail if the estimated direction is off by nearly 90°, leading to incorrect command execu-tion. Moreover, the physical configuration of the micro-phones for their binaural setup was not mentioned. As a solution to minimize the size of the setup for wearables, we break away from the traditional spatio-temporal sampling model and build on pioneering idea (Garg et al., 2021) of micro-structure assisted miniature and low-power acoustic front-end. This setup requires only a monaural microphone combined with a tiny microstructure to induce spatial diver-sity in the recorded signal, eliminating the need for multiple microphones while still enabling precise spatial encoding, making it an ultra-compact and low-power solution suitable for wearable applications. 

B. Spatial speech context in LLM. To capture critical spatial audio cues such as directionality and reverberation, we leverage the microstructure-based spatial sensing (Garg et al., 2021), which enables compact setup for wearables and higher DoA estimation accuracy. These cues are processed into embeddings using a lightweight architecture that only has 16.3 million parameters. The speech encoder utilized in this work is OpenAI’s Whisper model (Radford et al., 2023). Its encoder generates features that are well-suited for modeling speech and effectively incorporate contextual information about background noises (Gong et al., 2023). 

C. Aligning spatial speech context to LLM. To integrate spatial audio understanding into LLMs, we propose a two-step alignment framework that bridges the spatial encoder, Whisper’s speech-to-text encoder, and the LLM. First, the spatial encoder processes acoustic signals to extract direc-tional and spatial cues, such as DoA, and generates embed-dings that encapsulate spatial information. Simultaneously, Whisper encodes speech signals into rich linguistic repre-sentations, capturing both semantic content and background context. We adopt the approach outlined in LLava (Liu et al., 2024), employing a simple linear layer as a projection matrix, denoted as W, to map the spatial features into the language embedding space of the LLM. Then, the fused embeddings are aligned with the input space of the LLM using a lightweight adapter module and fine-tuned on task-specific prompts using low-rank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021). This approach allows the LLM to interpret spatially enriched embeddings and produce outputs that are both contextually and spatially aware, enabling advanced applications in spatial speech understanding and wearable interactions. Our key contributions are summarized below: 

• We present a novel framework that integrates spatial au-dio cues with LLMs, enabling advanced spatial speech understanding for real-world wearable applications. 

• We design a novel spatial encoder tailored for microstructure-based spatial sensing, enabling precise DoA estimation with minimal hardware. This compact and efficient encoder is specifically optimized for small, wearable devices. 

• Our framework enables wearable devices to perform ad-vanced tasks such as spatially aware automatic speech recognition (ASR), meeting summarization with spatial context, and immersive audio experiences, showcasing the potential for applications in augmented reality, acces-sibility, and beyond. 

# 2. Related Work 

2.1. Spatial Audio Detection 

Spatial audio processing involves techniques from both tra-ditional signal processing and modern deep learning ap-proaches to extract spatial information from sound sources. Signal processing methods, such as beamforming (Xu et al., 2017a), generalized cross-correlation (GCC) (Knapp & Carter, 1976), and eigenvector-based techniques like MU-SIC (Schmidt, 1986) and ESPRIT (Roy & Kailath, 1989), utilize phase differences and time delays between micro-phone pairs to estimate the DoA. While effective, these methods often require large microphone arrays and can struggle in reverberant environments. Deep learning mod-els, including convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Ada-vanne et al., 2018), recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Xu et al., 2017b), and transformer-based architectures (Park et al., 2021), have demonstrated success in learning spatial features from raw audio and spectrograms, often achieving superior results in complex scenarios, but microphone arrays are still required. Recent developments in microstructure-based sensing, where a monaural microphone is embed-ded in a designed physical structure to create directionally-dependent frequency responses, offer a promising approach for minimalist spatial audio sensing (Garg et al., 2021). 2SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables 

This method, inspired by biological systems like owl hear-ing, introduce new opportunities for low-cost, efficient DoA estimation while balancing physical constraints with data-driven learning. 

2.2. Multimodal Large Language Models 

Recent advancements in multimodal large language models (LLMs)(Yin et al., 2023; Song et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024a; Hsieh et al., 2024) have significantly expanded their capabilities across various modalities, including audio, mu-sic, and visual data. AudioGPT (Huang et al., 2024b) inte-grates ChatGPT as a versatile interface for a wide array of audio and speech-related tasks, enabling complex reasoning and synthesis using natural language prompts. For music understanding, another work introduced a framework com-bining the MERT music encoder (Li et al., 2023b) with an LLM, achieving state-of-the-art results in tasks such as mu-sic captioning and mood classification. While audio-based LLMs are gaining traction, multimodal LLMs have been more extensively explored in the visual domain (Li et al., 2024; 2023a; Liu et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024). Several models focus on image understanding by combining LLMs with advanced vision encoders. BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023a) employs a pre-trained Vision Transformer (ViT) to extract visual embeddings, which are then aligned with an LLM for tasks such as image captioning, visual question answering (VQA), and reasoning about visual content. LLaVA (Liu et al., 2024) extends this framework with a lightweight vi-sual encoder and cross-modal training strategies, enabling improved performance in open-ended visual reasoning tasks. These advancements underscore the expanding landscape of multimodal LLMs, highlighting the importance of robust cross-modal architectures for diverse real-world applica-tions across audio, music, image, and video tasks. 

2.3. Spatial-Aware Large Language Models 

LLMs have become increasingly popular and useful for var-ious AI-driven applications (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Team, 2023; Anthropic, 2023; MosaicML, 2023). However, the integration of LLMs with physical context, particularly in spatial audio perception, remains sparse. Re-cent papers, such as BAT (Zheng et al., 2024) and “Can Large Language Models Understand Spatial Audio?” (Tang et al., 2024), have explored integrating spatial audio with LLMs, focusing on non-speech sounds and requiring larger microphone arrays. In contrast, our work targets spatial speech processing using monaural setup with microstruc-ture sensing, enabling superior angular resolution with a smaller hardware footprint suitable for wearables. The goal for using the spatial speech is to enhance speech clarity and intelligibility by allowing listeners to distinguish multiple speakers based on spatial positioning. SALMONN (Tang et al., 2023) and GAMA (Ghosh et al., 2024) address speech tasks but lack spatial awareness, limiting their applicability to speech understanding. Our work bridges this gap, empha-sizing low-power, privacy-preserving processing tailored for real-world wearable deployment. 

# 3. Microstructure-Assisted Spatial Encoding 

3.1. Spatial Encoding Microstructure 

Microstructure-assisted spatial encoding builds upon the innovative hardware design introduced in Owlet (Garg et al., 2021), which utilizes a compact two-microphone array in-tegrated with a microstructure to achieve high spatial reso-lution. As shown in Figure 1, the microstructure modifies sound wavefronts as they propagate, introducing distinct acoustic patterns that encode angular information. Passive structure  

> interacts with
> sound
> Directional
> signature embedding
> Low -power and miniaturized
> spatial sensing with acoustic
> micro -structures
> Directional signature encoding
> Without microstructure
> With microstructure
> Figure 1. The vision and technical overview of Owlet (Garg et al., 2021), a low-power and miniaturized system for introducing spatial information into monaural recording of sound.

The Owlet system achieves spatial diversity in sound sensing with a monaural setup by leveraging the physical principles of diffraction, capillary effects, and structural resonance within a carefully designed microstructure. Diffraction oc-curs as sound waves bend and scatter when interacting with the edges and barriers inside the structure, creating phase shifts and amplitude variations that depend on the sound’s DoA. Capillary effects arise from the narrow chan-nels within the microstructure, where confined spaces alter sound propagation by introducing pressure gradients and phase delays, further emphasizing directional differences in the received signal. Additionally, structural resonance occurs when specific sound frequencies align with the nat-ural resonance modes of the structure, amplifying certain frequency components while attenuating others based on the sound’s angle of incidence. By combining these three mech-anisms, the Owlet design introduces directionally dependent frequency responses, enabling precise DoA estimation with minimal hardware complexity, avoiding the need for large microphone arrays while maintaining high spatial resolu-tion. 

Monaural Recording Hardware: In its original design, Owlet used two microphones, with an additional one placed outside the microstructure cap. This extra microphone helped reduce the impact of room impulse response on di-3SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables 

rectional cues. Despite utilizing multiple microphones, the system produces a monaural recording, where the sound wave is essentially sampled at a single spatial location. Un-like binaural recording hardware, which uses two separated microphones to achieve spatial diversity, Owlet’s hardware captures multiple recordings using closely placed micro-phones. As elaborated in Section 4, we leveraged the sec-ond channel from the microphone outside the microstructure for speech encoding and the microstructure-covered micro-phone channel for DoA encoding. 

3.2. Spatial Speech Generation 

Capturing and annotating spatial speech in real-world envi-ronments is often a labor-intensive process, further compli-cated by variations in acoustic properties and the constraints of recording equipment. To efficiently generate a diverse dataset that covers a wide range of sound sources while en-suring comprehensive ground-truth metadata, a simulation-based approach has been adopted. For this study, we utilized the Librispeech dataset (Panay-otov et al., 2015), a publicly available corpus of high-quality English speech, sampled at 16KHz. The dataset provides phonetically diverse speech recordings, large vocabulary, and clean and noisy subsets, making it ideal for speech recognition and spatial analysis under different acoustic con-ditions (Words, 2025). For the application of spatial ASR, we generated a comprehensive 400-hour spatial speech dataset. We pick 500 original samples from the LibriSpeech dataset, and convoluted them with the impulse responses from 1° to 360° with 1° resolution. For the application of soundscaping, leveraging LibriSpeech, we generated a comprehensive 2,000-hour spatial speech dataset that simulates scenarios involving 1 to 5 speakers speaking simultaneously. To ensure robust and representa-tive data, the number of speakers is evenly distributed across the dataset, with uniform coverage of DoA angles. This de-sign enhances the dataset’s robustness to variations in DoA, speaker count, and speaker diversity. Multi-speaker sam-ples were created by randomly selecting speech segments and assigning distinct DoA values, ensuring realistic spa-tial distributions and promoting generalization to real-world scenarios. Our dataset symbolizes the 360° spatial diversity and multi-speaker dynamics it embodies, offering a robust foundation for spatial speech processing. 

Spatial Speech Generation Process : We created a syn-thetic spatial speech dataset by convolving the clean Lib-rispeech signals with Owlet-specific impulse response at discrete angles. The system utilizes a set of frequency-domain impulse response H(ω, θ ), where ω represents the angular frequency and θ denotes the angle of arrival (in de-grees). Since the microstructure has a consistent shape, we did a one-time calibration of the impulse response. These responses represent how the Owlet microstructure-based array processes incoming speech signals from different di-rections. To convert the frequency-domain representation into the time domain, an Inverse Fast Fourier Transform (IFFT) (Heckbert, 1995) is applied: 

hθ (t) = F−1{H(ω, θ )} (1) where hθ (t) is the time-domain impulse response for angle 

θ. This transformation is performed for all the desired an-gles θ ∈ [1 , 360] , yielding angle-specific impulse responses. The 360° azimuth angles are defined in a canonical frame relative to the sensor hardware, assuming the device is in an upright orientation. In our current setup, we align the sen-sor’s forward-facing direction with 0°, and angles increase clockwise in the horizontal (azimuthal) plane. Each speech file yoriginal (n), sampled at original rate foriginal is loaded and resampled to a uniform sampling frequency fs = 16 kHz .This ensures consistency across all signals for accurate con-volution wiht the impulse responses. The resampled signal 

y(n) is obtained as: 

y(n) = Resample  yoriginal (n), f s, f original 

 (2) where the resampling operation adjusts the temporal resolu-tion of the signal while preserving it’s content. To simulate how speech signal is perceived at angle θ, the resampled speech signal y(n) is convolved with the corre-sponding impulse response hθ (n). The discrete-time convo-lution operation (Cheng & Desoer, 1982) is defined as: 

yconv ,θ (n) = ( y ∗ hθ )( n) = 

> ∞

X

> m=−∞

y(m) · hθ (n − m) (3) where, 

• y(m) is amplitude of the speech signal at time index m.

• hθ (n−m) is the impulse response of the system for angle 

θ, delayed by m samples. 

• yconv ,θ (n) is the resulting signal after the speech is filtered by the spatial characteristics at angle θ.Refer to the spectrogram of recordings from different direc-tions in Appendix K. Our dataset provides a high-fidelity synthetic spatial speech corpus tailored for evaluating monaural spatial sensing mod-els. By leveraging Owlet-specific impulse responses, our dataset accurately simulates how speech signals are per-ceived at different angles, ensuring realistic spatial encoding. The one-time calibrated impulse responses maintain consis-tency across experiments, eliminating variations caused by 4SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables 

environmental changes. Furthermore, the dataset is derived from Librispeech, a widely used speech corpus, ensuring high-quality linguistic content. The rigorous preprocessing steps, including uniform resampling and frequency-to-time domain transformation via IFFT, guarantee temporal align-ment and signal integrity. By applying discrete-time con-volution with angle-specific impulse responses, our dataset faithfully replicates the directional filtering imposed by the Owlet microstructure, making it an ideal benchmark for spatial speech recognition and DoA estimation tasks. 

# 4. SING: Spatial Context to Wearable LLM 

Our system is designed to integrate spatial speech under-standing into LLMs while addressing the unique constraints of wearable devices. It consists of three main components: spatial speech sensing, embedding alignment, and LLM fine-tuning. As shown in Figure 2, the spatial speech sensing module uses a Owlet recording hardware to capture high-resolution spatial cues, such as directionality, without the need for a traditional large microphone array. The record-ings from the two channels of the Owlet are the input for the DoA encoder and the speech encoder. Spatial cues are pro-cessed into low-dimensional embeddings using lightweight models. Whisper encodes raw speech into dense speech em-beddings that capture linguistic features. These embeddings together with spatial embeddings are then aligned with the input space of LLMs. The LLM is then fine-tuned on our spatial speech dataset, enabling it to interpret speech and DoA. 

4.1. Spatial Speech Encoder Speech signal preprocessing. Different from existing work that uses an array of microphones for spatial sensing, our system uses only a monaural microphone inside the mi-crostructure. Given the different impulse responses from directions of speech, the amplitude of the signal changes overtime, and different frequencies have different patterns of amplitude change. Due to this nature, we convert the cap-tured signal from time domain x(n) to frequency domain 

X(t, f ) using STFT 

X(t, f ) =  

> N−1

X

> n=0

x(n) · w[n − t] · e−j 2πf n N (4) where w(n) represents a Window function of length N. Then we convert the output into mel scale, 

Smel (t, j ) = log 

> K

X

> k=1

|X(t, f )|2 · Hj (k) + ϵ

!

(5) where Hj (k) is Mel filter for the j-th band, and ϵ is a small constant to avoid log of zero. 

DoA Encoder. The DoA encoder is a convolutional neural network, balancing computational efficiency with robust fea-ture extraction. The architecture consists of three sequential convolutional blocks, each comprising a 2D convolutional layer, batch normalization for stabilizing training, a ReLU activation function, and max-pooling for spatial dimension reduction. A flattening layer reshapes the output from the convolutional layers into a 1D vector, which is then passed through a fully connected layer with 512 units, followed by a dropout layer to mitigate overfitting. The final linear layer maps the high-dimensional feature vector to DoA pre-diction output. Refer to the 3D UMAP visualization of the embeddings from different angles in Appendix G. 

4.2. Speech-to-text Encoder. 

The speech encoder utilized in this work is OpenAI’s Whis-per model (Radford et al., 2023). Its encoder generates features that are well-suited for modeling speech and ef-fectively incorporating contextual information about back-ground noises (Gong et al., 2023). To extract Whisper em-beddings, speech files are first processed to ensure con-sistency in sampling rate, mono channel format and fixed duration by padding to 30 seconds. The processed wave-forms are passed through the WhsiperProcessor for feature extraction, which generates mel-spectrogram features as input to the model. We use a whisper-large-v3(Whisper) model for generating features. The encoder outputs hid-den states for each time frame, representing intermediate representations for each time frame that capture both seman-tic content and acoustic context of the speech signal. To reduce the dimensionality while preserving critical infor-mation, adaptive average pooling is applied to the hidden states along the temporal axis, yielding fixed-size embed-dings of shape [POOL SIZE, hidden dim] for each speech file, where POOL SIZE is 128 and hidden dim is 1024. The embeddings illustrate both temporal and semantic character-istics of the speech for downstream tasks such as transcrip-tion. 

4.3. Alignment to LLM Space Pretraining. The spatial encoder in our system is pre-trained on a spatial ASR task consisting of two subtasks: DoA prediction, and speech recognition. The DoA task estimates the directional angles of each speaker. The ASR task transcribes spoken speech into text. The two tasks are optimized using cross-entropy loss. The spatial embeddings derived from DoA and the Whisper encoder are not inher-ently aligned with the input space of LLMs. To address this, we adopted the approach outlined in LLava (Liu et al., 2024), employing a simple linear layer as a projection matrix, de-noted as W, to map the spatial features into the language em-bedding space of the LLM. This linear projection layer was selected for its lightweight design, offering a more efficient 5SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables  

> Figure 2. Spatial-aware framework for direction and speech transcription.

and streamlined solution compared to the Q-Former connec-tion module used in BLIP2 (Li et al., 2023a), the perceiver resampler and cross-attention layers in Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022). This design choice prioritizes efficiency and simplicity, ensuring seamless integration without adding significant complexity to the model architecture. 

Supervised Fine-Tuning. We fine-tuned our pre-trained model using an instruction fine-tuning approach to enhance the LLM’s ability to follow human instructions and provide greater control over its output. Specifically, we adopted a su-pervised fine-tuning (SFT) strategy (SFT Trainer), enabling the model to learn from spatial embeddings, prompts, and their corresponding responses under direct supervision. For this purpose, we use the LLaMA 3.2 3B model (Touvron et al., 2023) with LoRA (Hu et al., 2021), a method that optimizes the fine-tuning process for spatial speech under-standing. (Refer to the detailed prompts in Appendix I) Instead of modifying the entire model, LoRA introduces trainable low-rank matrices into the lower layers of the LLM, significantly reducing computational and memory overhead while accelerating training. 

# 5. Soundscaping: Multi-DoA Encoder 

Soundscaping for LLM will enhance human-AI interaction by creating more natural, immersive and context-aware au-ditory experiences. We present the first approach to incorpo-rate multi-direction of arrival (multi-DoA) information into an LLM. Our multi-DoA encoder consists of two key com-ponents: a number-of-speaker encoder and a DoA encoder. The number-of-speaker encoder predicts the count of active speakers in the environment. (Refer to the performance of number-of-speaker encoder in Appendix J) Based on the number of speakers, we call the corresponding DoA encoder, capturing the precise DoA angles. We train 5 DoA encoders, ranging from 1 to 5 speakers. The embeddings generated by the number-of-speaker encoder and the corresponding DoA encoder are concatenated to form a unified representation, which serves as the output of our spatial speech encoder Z

as: 

Zspatial = Concat (N um −speaker (X), DoA (X)) , (6) where X is a 8-second speech input, Num-speaker(·) and DoA(·) are the number-of-speaker encoder and DoA enoder, Concat(·) is the concatenation operation along the feature dimension. The number-of-speaker encoder follows same structure as the DoA encoder introduced in Section 4.1. The DoA encoders share the same structure involves adjusting the final fully connected layer to produce a regression output representing multiple DoAs sorted in ascending order. This change allows the model to handle dynamic outputs while maintaining the original convolutional structure for feature extraction. The concatenated embedding is also aligned to the LLM space following the same strategy as described in Section 4.3. We prepared question answer pair for finetuning the LLM model generating contextual responses for multiple DoA detection. 

# 6. Evaluation of Spatial-Aware ASR 

6.1. Dataset 

To evaluate the proposed microstructure-based spatial speech encoder, there are no publicly available real or syn-thetic datasets that consist of general speech. Since DNN-based methods need sufficiently large datasets to train on, we first calibrate the impulse response of the microstructure from all angles, and then create a large synthetic dataset by convolving the calibrated impulse response with the speech 6SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables  

> Table 1. Comparison of performance on spatially aware ASR with one sound source. BAT supports DoA estimation and audio source type recognition, while SALMONN focuses on speech ASR and other LLM functions but lacks spatial awareness. Our model uniquely integrates DoA and ASR for spatially aware ASR.

Model Supported Task Metric / Performance 

BAT DoA Estimation + Audio Source Recognition (No Speech) MAE (°) ↓: 88.52 SING [our work] DoA + Speech ASR (Spatial Awareness) MAE (°) ↓: 25.72 

SALMONN Speech ASR and LLM Functions (No Spatial Awareness) WER (%) ↓: 2.2 SING [our work] Speech ASR (without DoA) WER (%) ↓: 1.8 

SING [our work] DoA + Speech ASR (Spatial Awareness) WER (%) ↓: 5.3 samples in the LibriSpeech dataset, as described in Section 3.2. After convolution with the impulse responses, we trim or pad these clips to 30 seconds. The resulting waveforms are monaural with only 1 channel at a 16kHz sampling rate. We use a window size of 400, a hop size of 160, and 80 mel-bins to compute the Short-Time Fourier Transforms (STFTs) and mel-spectrograms. As a result, for a 30-second recording, the Mel-spectrogram feature dimension is (1, 80, 3000). 

6.2. Training Details DoA encoder. The encoder is trained on an A100 GPU, with each epoch taking approximately 20 minutes. The total number of epochs is 20. The encoder was first trained as a regression task where the output are the DoA values. We take the last fully-connected layer as the embedding. 

LLM alignment and fine-tuning. This part is separated into two stages. We first freeze the LLM model to train parameters for the projection layer. After the loss has con-verged to stable, we fine-tune the LLM model using LoRA to enhance the LLM’s ability to follow human instructions and provide greater control over its output. The training is completed on 3 H100 80 GB GPUs. Refer to the hyperpa-rameters for training in Appendix B. 

6.3. Performance on Spatially Aware ASR 

There is currently no existing work that integrates both DoA estimation and ASR within a LLM framework. To provide a comprehensive evaluation, we separately compare our model’s DoA performance with BAT and its ASR perfor-mance with SALMONN, as shown in Table 1. Since we only use the monaural microphone inside the mi-crostructure for DoA estimation, we compare our perfor-mance with BAT in monaural case. Our model achieves a significantly lower Mean Absolute Error (MAE) of 25.72° compared to BAT’s 88.52°. This result underscores the strength of our microstructure-based spatial encoding, which enables precise localization of sound sources in a computationally efficient manner, outperforming BAT’s ap-proach. Our system also shows robust performance under noise and room reverberation, as shown in Appendix E. Moreover, we evaluated the performance for three other speech datasets and one audio dataset. Further details can be found in Appendix F. In terms of ASR, while our model achieves a word error rate (WER) of 5.3% for speech recognition in the spatial ASR configuration, which is higher than SALMONN’s WER of 2.2%, it is important to highlight that our model incorporates spatial features, a capability absent in SALMONN. Integrat-ing spatial information, such as DoA, introduces additional complexity to the task by requiring the model to jointly process acoustic and spatial cues. This enables advanced spatial reasoning and makes our approach more versatile for applications involving spatially distributed sound sources. Furthermore, when spatial features are excluded, our model achieves a WER of 1.8%, outperforming SALMONN and demonstrating its strong baseline performance for speech recognition. These results underscore that the inclusion of spatial features, while slightly increasing the WER, signifi-cantly broadens the utility of the model, offering a trade-off between basic recognition accuracy and enhanced spatial awareness. Refer to the qualitative examples in Appendix C. 

# 7. Evaluation of Multi-DoA Encoder 

7.1. Dataset 

Five datasets are generated with no temporally overlap-ping sources, maximum two overlapping sources, maximum three overlapping sound sources, four overlapping sound sources, and five overlapping sound sources. We start syn-thesizing a recording by randomly choosing the number of speech samples. Then we randomly pick the number of DoAs that at least 10 degrees of separations are guaranteed between sound sources to avoid spatial overlapping. After convolving the speeches with the impulse response of its DoA, the convoluted speeches are summed together as the final recording. The final recordings are first loudness nor-malized by scaling them so that each clip has the same total sound energy. The final recording is trimmed or padded to 8 seconds. The resulting waveforms are monaural with 7SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables    

> Table 2. Comparison of MAE DOA error and MEEM across models with a known number of active sources. MEEM is calculated as MSE ×(Number of Microphones ).

Model Metric 1 Source 2 Sources 3 Sources 4 Sources 5 Sources 

SELDNet MAE ( ↓) 90.03 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗

MEEM ( ↓) 360.12 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗

Median Error ( ↓) 90.14 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗

AudioMAE MAE ( ↓) 43.79 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗

MEEM ( ↓) 43.79 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗

Median Error ( ↓) 27.79 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗

SING (Ours) MAE ( ↓) 25.72 24.16 28.11 23.31 17.08 

MEEM ( ↓) 25.72 24.16 28.11 23.31 17.08 

Median Error ( ↓) 13.00 13.00 20.00 18.00 13.00 

only 1 channel at a 16kHz sampling rate. We use a win-dow size of 2048, a hop size of 512, and 128 mel-bins to compute the Short-Time Fourier Transforms (STFTs) and mel-spectrograms. As a result, for a 8-second recording, the Mel-spectrogram feature dimension is (1, 128, 251). 

7.2. Baseline 

Since our approach enables DoA estimation using a monau-ral microphone, which is fundamentally not achievable with traditional signal processing methods like MUSIC (Kundu, 1996; Tang, 2014) that rely on multiple microphones, we instead compare our model against deep learning-based al-gorithms, as they can be designed to handle both monaural and array-based spatial sensing setups. We compare our performance with array-based speech DoA detection SELD-Net (Adavanne et al., 2018). Following the evaluation of BAT (Zheng et al., 2024), we train the monaural-microphone based model AudioMAE (Huang et al., 2022) using our microstructure-encoded monaural-microphone dataset for DoA estimation. 

7.3. Evaluation Metrics 

To comprehensively evaluate the performance of our model and facilitate fair comparisons with prior works, we employ three metrics: Mean Absolute Error (MAE), the Modified Error Efficiency Metric (MEEM), and median error. MAE is a widely used metric that quantifies the average angular difference, in degrees, between the estimated and ground-truth DoA. This metric directly evaluates the accuracy of the DoA predictions, offering an intuitive understanding of the model’s spatial localization capabilities. In addi-tion to MAE, we introduce MEEM, which is designed to normalize the performance by accounting for the number of microphones used in the system. MEEM is calculated as MEEM=MSE×(Number of Microphones), where MSE represents the mean squared error of the DoA predictions. Unlike traditional metrics, MEEM provides a balanced view of model efficiency by penalizing setups that require a larger number of microphones, making it particularly useful for comparing models designed for minimalist setups like ours. By combining these two metrics, we not only assess the raw accuracy of the models but also highlight the efficiency of our approach in leveraging a monaural microphone com-pared to multi-microphone arrays. We also show the median error of DoA as a better understanding of the distribution of errors. 

7.4. Performance of DoA Estimation 

Table 2 presents the DoA estimation performance of various models under scenarios with a known number of active sources. SELDNet (Adavanne et al., 2018), utilizing four microphones, shows relatively high MAE error for a single source (90.03°). Due to the lack of spatial information in AudioMAE, it shows a MAE of 43.79° and a median error of 27.79°. Our proposed model, using only one microphone, achieves competitive performance despite its minimalist hardware setup. For one source, it yields an MAE of 25.72° and median error of 13.00°, which outperforms AudioMAE, showing the efficiency of microstructure. Notably, for scenarios involving two or more sources, our model demonstrates robust performance with MAE val-ues of 24.16°, 28.11°, 23.31°, and 17.08° for two, three, four, and five sources, respectively. Refer to the CDF plots in Appendix H. These results highlight the ability of our monaural-microphone approach to provide reasonable DoA estimation accuracy while minimizing hardware complexity, making it suitable for wearable and low-power applications. Additionally, the MEEM values underline the efficiency of our approach in leveraging minimal hardware without sig-nificant performance trade-offs. For qualitative results, refer to Appendix D. We also evaluated by comparing our model SING with CNN-based Owlet model. As shown in the CDF plots in Ap-pendix M, our model, SING, has comparable performance with the similar experiment for the DoA estimation accuracy reported in the Owlet. 8SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables 

# 8. Discussion and Future Work 

Our work demonstrates the feasibility of integrating spatial speech understanding into LLMs through a novel combina-tion of spatial audio encoders, DoA estimation, and speech recognition. By leveraging compact microstructure-based sensing, we enable accurate speech transcription and spatial awareness using significantly compact microphones com-pared to traditional systems. Our method embeds spatial cues directly within a monaural recording, allowing precise DoA estimation in an extremely compact design, unlocking new possibilities for minimalist perception approaches and wearable sensing technologies. While our model achieves competitive performance in both numerical and qualitative evaluations, several limitations and opportunities for future exploration remain. 

Future work. Future work will focus on extending the spa-tial encoder to support elevation angle estimation, enabling full 3D spatial audio processing. Furthermore, collecting real-world datasets with diverse acoustic conditions and speaker configurations will enhance the robustness and ap-plicability of the system. Another promising direction is the integration of multimodal inputs, such as combining visual information from cameras with audio, to improve spatial understanding and enable richer context-aware appli-cations. We also plan to optimize the system for low-power hardware, ensuring its viability for real-time processing on wearable devices. 

# 9. Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced a framework for spatial speech understanding integrated with LLMs, enabling directional audio processing and speech recognition on compact wear-able devices. Through a microstructure-based spatial en-coder and alignment with Whisper embeddings, our system achieves DoA estimation and speech ASR performance with minimal hardware resources. This work paves the way for enhancing wearable technologies in applications such as augmented reality and accessibility, laying a foundation for future advancements in spatially aware LLMs. 

# Acknowledgment 

This work was partially supported by NSF CAREER Award 2238433. We also thank our industry partners for their continued support of the iCoSMoS Laboratory at UMD. 

# Impact Statement 

This work introduces a novel framework for integrating spa-tial audio context into LLMs, specifically designed for wear-able devices. By leveraging microstructure-based spatial sensing and efficient fusion techniques, this research ad-dresses key challenges in spatial speech processing, such as computational efficiency, privacy, and hardware constraints. The proposed system paves the way for transformative ap-plications in augmented reality, accessibility, and interactive computing, enabling context-aware and intelligent interac-tions between humans and machines. Beyond its technical contributions, this work has the potential to improve ac-cessibility for individuals with disabilities, enhance safety in search-and-rescue operations, and redefine user experi-ences in immersive environments. While promising, the ethical implications of deploying such systems, including privacy and responsible use, must be carefully considered to maximize societal benefits. 

# References 

Adavanne, S., Politis, A., Nikunen, J., and Virtanen, T. Sound event localization and detection of overlapping sources using convolutional recurrent neural networks. 

IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing , 13 (1):34–48, 2018. Alayrac, J.-B., Donahue, J., Luc, P., Miech, A., Barr, I., Hasson, Y., Lenc, K., Mensch, A., Millican, K., Reynolds, M., et al. Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:23716–23736, 2022. Anthropic. Claude language model by anthropic. https: //www.anthropic.com/index/claude , 2023. Ardila, R., Branson, M., Davis, K., Henretty, M., Kohler, M., Meyer, J., Morais, R., Saunders, L., Tyers, F. M., and Weber, G. Common voice: A massively-multilingual speech corpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06670 , 2019. Chen, C., Jain, U., Schissler, C., Gari, S. V. A., Al-Halah, Z., Ithapu, V. K., Robinson, P., and Grauman, K. Soundspaces: Audio-visual navigation in 3d environ-ments. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceed-ings, Part VI 16 , pp. 17–36. Springer, 2020. Chen, J. C.-Y., Saha, S., Stengel-Eskin, E., and Bansal, M. Magdi: Structured distillation of multi-agent interaction graphs improves reasoning in smaller language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01620 , 2024. Cheng, V. and Desoer, C. Discrete time convolution control systems. International Journal of Control , 36(3):367– 407, 1982. Choi, H. K. and Li, Y. Picle: eliciting diverse behaviors from large language models with persona in-context learning. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024. 9SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables 

Cui, C., Ma, Y., Cao, X., Ye, W., and Wang, Z. Drive as you speak: Enabling human-like interaction with large language models in autonomous vehicles. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pp. 902–909, 2024. FusionChat. The future of listening: Google pixel buds to feature gemini llm and ai assistant, 2025. URL https: //fusionchat.ai/news/the-future-of-l istening-google-pixel-buds-to-feature -gemini-llm-and-ai-assistant . Accessed: 2025-01-30. Gan, C., Zhang, Y., Wu, J., Gong, B., and Tenenbaum, J. B. Look, listen, and act: Towards audio-visual embodied navigation. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 9701–9707. IEEE, 2020. Garg, N., Bai, Y., and Roy, N. Owlet: Enabling spatial in-formation in ubiquitous acoustic devices. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services , pp. 255–268, 2021. Gerganov, G. whisper.cpp: High-performance inference of openai’s whisper automatic speech recognition (asr) model in c/c++. https://github.com/ggml-o rg/whisper.cpp , 2023. Accessed: 2025-05-09. Ghosh, S., Kumar, S., Seth, A., Evuru, C. K. R., Tyagi, U., Sakshi, S., Nieto, O., Duraiswami, R., and Manocha, D. Gama: A large audio-language model with advanced au-dio understanding and complex reasoning abilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11768 , 2024. Gong, Y., Chung, Y.-A., and Glass, J. Ast: Audio spec-trogram transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.01778 ,2021. Gong, Y., Khurana, S., Karlinsky, L., and Glass, J. Whisper-at: Noise-robust automatic speech recognizers are also strong general audio event taggers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03183 , 2023. Heckbert, P. Fourier transforms and the fast fourier trans-form (fft) algorithm. Computer Graphics , 2(1995):15– 463, 1995. Hsieh, C.-Y., Zhang, J., Ma, Z., Kembhavi, A., and Kr-ishna, R. Sugarcrepe: Fixing hackable benchmarks for vision-language compositionality. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36, 2024. Hu, E. J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., and Chen, W. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 ,2021. Huang, D., Yan, C., Li, Q., and Peng, X. From large lan-guage models to large multimodal models: A literature review. Applied Sciences , 14(12):5068, 2024a. Huang, P.-Y., Xu, H., Li, J., Baevski, A., Auli, M., Galuba, W., Metze, F., and Feichtenhofer, C. Masked autoen-coders that listen. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 35:28708–28720, 2022. Huang, R., Li, M., Yang, D., Shi, J., Chang, X., Ye, Z., Wu, Y., Hong, Z., Huang, J., Liu, J., et al. Audiogpt: Understanding and generating speech, music, sound, and talking head. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pp. 23802–23804, 2024b. Ito, K. The lj speech dataset. Online, 2017. URL http s://keithito.com/LJ-Speech-Dataset/ .Accessed: 2025-01-29. Kailas, G. and Tiwari, N. Design for immersive experience: Role of spatial audio in extended reality applications. In 

Design for Tomorrow—Volume 2: Proceedings of ICoRD 2021 , pp. 853–863. Springer, 2021. Knapp, C. and Carter, G. The generalized correlation method for estimation of time delay. IEEE transactions on acoustics, speech, and signal processing , 24(4):320– 327, 1976. Kumar, L. P. and Kabiri, A. Meeting summarization: A survey of the state of the art. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08206 , 2022. Kumaran, V., Rowe, J., Mott, B., and Lester, J. Scenecraft: Automating interactive narrative scene generation in dig-ital games with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and In-teractive Digital Entertainment , volume 19, pp. 86–96, 2023. Kundu, D. Modified music algorithm for estimating doa of signals. Signal processing , 48(1):85–90, 1996. Li, J., Li, D., Savarese, S., and Hoi, S. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 19730–19742. PMLR, 2023a. Li, W., Fan, H., Wong, Y., Yang, Y., and Kankanhalli, M. Improving context understanding in multimodal large language models via multimodal composition learning. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024. Li, Y., Yuan, R., Zhang, G., Ma, Y., Chen, X., Yin, H., Xiao, C., Lin, C., Ragni, A., Benetos, E., et al. Mert: 10 SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables 

Acoustic music understanding model with large-scale self-supervised training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00107 ,2023b. Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q., and Lee, Y. J. Visual instruction tun-ing. Advances in neural information processing systems ,36, 2024. Ma, Z., Yang, G., Yang, Y., Gao, Z., Wang, J., Du, Z., Yu, F., Chen, Q., Zheng, S., Zhang, S., et al. Speech recognition meets large language model: Benchmarking, models, and exploration. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pp. 24840–24848, 2025. McInnes, L., Healy, J., and Melville, J. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426 , 2018. MosaicML. Introducing mpt-7b: A new standard for open-source, commercially usable language models. 2023. URL https://www.mosaicml.com/blog/mp t-7b .Nagrani, A., Chung, J. S., and Zisserman, A. Voxceleb: a large-scale speaker identification dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08612 , 2017. OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. URL https://arxiv.or g/abs/2303.08774 .Panayotov, V., Chen, G., Povey, D., and Khudanpur, S. Librispeech: an asr corpus based on public domain au-dio books. In 2015 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing (ICASSP) , pp. 5206–5210. IEEE, 2015. Park, S., Jeong, Y., and Lee, T. Many-to-many audio spec-trogram tansformer: Transformer for sound event local-ization and detection. In DCASE , pp. 105–109, 2021. Parkkola, K. Spatial audio techniques for inner voice repro-duction in virtual reality environments. 2023. Pekmezci, M. and Genc, Y. Evaluation of ssim loss function in rir generator gans. Digital Signal Processing , 154: 104685, 2024. Piczak, K. J. Esc: Dataset for environmental sound classi-fication. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM international conference on Multimedia , pp. 1015–1018, 2015. Radford, A., Kim, J. W., Xu, T., Brockman, G., McLeavey, C., and Sutskever, I. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 28492–28518. PMLR, 2023. Roy, R. and Kailath, T. Esprit-estimation of signal parame-ters via rotational invariance techniques. IEEE Transac-tions on acoustics, speech, and signal processing , 37(7): 984–995, 1989. Schmidt, R. Multiple emitter location and signal parameter estimation. IEEE transactions on antennas and propaga-tion , 34(3):276–280, 1986. SFT Trainer. Hugging face sft trainer documentation. URL 

https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/en/s ft_trainer .Song, S., Li, X., Li, S., Zhao, S., Yu, J., Ma, J., Mao, X., and Zhang, W. How to bridge the gap between modalities: A comprehensive survey on multimodal large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07594 , 2023. Sun, G., Yu, W., Tang, C., Chen, X., Tan, T., Li, W., Lu, L., Ma, Z., Wang, Y., and Zhang, C. video-salmonn: speech-enhanced audio-visual large language models. In 

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Ma-chine Learning , ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024. Tang, C., Yu, W., Sun, G., Chen, X., Tan, T., Li, W., Lu, L., Ma, Z., and Zhang, C. Salmonn: Towards generic hearing abilities for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13289 , 2023. Tang, C., Yu, W., Sun, G., Chen, X., Tan, T., Li, W., Zhang, J., Lu, L., Ma, Z., Wang, Y., et al. Can large lan-guage models understand spatial audio? arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07914 , 2024. Tang, H. Doa estimation based on music algorithm, 2014. Team, V. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality. LMSYS Org , 2023. URL 

https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vic una/ .Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.-A., Lacroix, T., Rozi `ere, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E., Azhar, F., et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 , 2023. Wang, Y., Yang, B., and Li, X. Fn-ssl: Full-band and narrow-band fusion for sound source localization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19610 , 2023. Whisper. Whisper large v3 model. URL https://hugg ingface.co/openai/whisper-large-v3 .Words, W. W. Top sources for high-quality speech data, 2025. URL https://waywithwords.net/res ource/top-sources-for-high-quality-s peech-data/ . Accessed: 2025-01-15. 11 SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables 

Xu, Q., Jiang, C., Han, Y., Wang, B., and Liu, K. R. Wave-forming: An overview with beamforming. IEEE Commu-nications Surveys & Tutorials , 20(1):132–149, 2017a. Xu, Y., Kong, Q., Huang, Q., Wang, W., and Plumbley, M. D. Convolutional gated recurrent neural network incorporat-ing spatial features for audio tagging. In 2017 Interna-tional Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pp. 3461–3466. IEEE, 2017b. Yang, B., Ding, R., Ban, Y., Li, X., and Liu, H. Enhancing direct-path relative transfer function using deep neural network for robust sound source localization. CAAI Trans-actions on Intelligence Technology , 7(3):446–454, 2022. Yin, S., Fu, C., Zhao, S., Li, K., Sun, X., Xu, T., and Chen, E. A survey on multimodal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.13549 , 2023. Zheng, Z., Peng, P., Ma, Z., Chen, X., Choi, E., and Harwath, D. Bat: Learning to reason about spatial sounds with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01591 ,2024. 12 SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables 

# A. Towards Spatially Aware Language Models 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have proven invaluable for a wide range of applications by assisting with complex tasks such as legal text interpretation and other specialized domains including healthcare, finance and academic research. However, as human interactions and real-world scenarios increasingly demand context that goes beyond textual or verbal cues, integrating spatial knowledge into LLMs has become essential. Humans not only understand semantic context but also perceive and interpret physical cues such as sound and location, which inform more holistic decision-making in daily life. In this vein, the physics-aware LLMs can power applications like autonomous robotics that need to navigate and interact with three-dimensional spaces, or digital-twins that can simulate real-world environments for urban planning, energy management, and supply chain optimization. By grounding LLMs in the realm of physical space, we ensure these models can provide more accurate, relevant and human like support, bridging the gap between abstract textual reasoning and tangible real-world contexts. 

# B. Hyperparameters 

SING presents specific hyperparameters for DoA encoder, LLM pretraining and finetuning in Table 3. 

Hyperparam DoA Encoder Num-of-speaker Encoder LLM Pretraining LLM Fine-Tuning batch size 32 32 8 8

num epochs 20 20 5 10 

learning rate 0.001 0.001 1e-5 1e-5 

patience 5 5 ✗ ✗

warmup steps ✗ ✗ 0 0

loss function MSELoss Cross Entropy Loss Causal LM loss Causal LM loss 

optimizer Adam Adam AdamW AdamW 

scheduler ReduceLROnPlateau ReduceLROnPlateau Linear Linear 

gradient chkpt ✗ ✗ Enabled Enabled 

max seq length ✗ ✗ 512 512 

LoRA rank (r) ✗ ✗ ✗ 8

LoRA alpha ✗ ✗ ✗ 16 

LoRA dropout ✗ ✗ ✗ 0.1 

device CPU/GPU CPU/GPU Multi-GPU Dist. Multi-GPU Dist. 

mixed precision ✗ ✗ FP16 autocast FP16 autocast  

> Table 3. Key hyperparameters for the DoA Encoder, Num-of-speaker Encoder, LLM Pretraining, and LLM Fine-Tuning. ‘ ✗‘ indicates that the hyperparameter does not apply.

# C. Responses Generated for Spatial-Aware ASR 

We present several examples of the spatial transcriptions from SING as shown in Table 4. 

Spatial Transcriptions 

The speaker is speaking approximately at angle 61 degrees. The speech says: Lectures. The speaker is speaking approximately at angle 182 degrees. The speech says: The Emperor’s Daughter. The speaker is speaking approximately at angle 140 degrees. The speech says: The Wandering Singer. The speaker is speaking approximately at angle 96 degrees. The speech says: Tom nodded worriedly.  

> Table 4. Spatial-aware ASR.

# D. Responses Generated for Multiple Direction of Arrival Detection 

Table 5 presents several examples of number of sound source inference and the DoA detections from SING. 13 SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables 

Num of Sources Response Generated 

1 There is one speech source. The speech source’s degree of arrival is 77.0 degrees. 2 There are 2 speech sources. Speech source 1’s degree of arrival is 39.0 degrees, and speech source 2’s degree of arrival is 101.0 degrees. 3 There are 3 speech sources. speech source 1’s degree of arrival is 18 degrees, speech source 2’s degree of arrival is 39 degrees, and speech source 3’s degree of arrival is 257 degrees. 4 There are 4 speech sources. Speech source 1’s degree of arrival is 3 degrees, speech source 2’s degree of arrival is 118 degrees, speech source 3’s degree of arrival is 203 degrees, and speech source 4’s degree of arrival is 242 degrees. 5 There are 5 speech sources. Speech source 1’s degree of arrival is 34 degrees, speech source 2’s degree of arrival is 161 degrees, speech source 3’s degree of arrival is 195 degrees, speech source 4’s degree of arrival is 234 degrees, and speech source 5’s degree of arrival is 317 degrees.  

> Table 5. Response generated for multiple DoA detection.

# E. Performance under Noise and Room Reverberation 

To evaluate the impact of noise and reverberation on our system’s performance, we leverage the GTU-RIR dataset (Pekmezci & Genc, 2024). This dataset provides high-fidelity room impulse responses (RIRs) measured in diverse acoustic environments. including 11 rooms with types of classroom, conference hall, sports hall, office, hotel room and staircase, making it ideal for simulating realistic reverberation conditions in our evaluation. To systematically assess the robustness of our model, we conduct experiments under controlled conditions with varying levels of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and reverberation. Table 6 presents the results, showing the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Median Error in degrees across different test conditions. Our findings indicate that while reverberation and noise impact DoA accuracy, our system remains robust compared to existing work. Specifically, without noise or reverberation, we achieve a MAE of 25.72°, which increases to 48.69° under reverberation, demonstrating the effect of multipath reflections. The addition of noise at different SNR levels further degrades performance, with errors increasing as noise levels rise. These results underscore the importance of robust spatial encoding techniques in real-world applications, particularly in noisy and reverberant environments. Future work will focus on adaptive denoising strategies and spatial de-reverberation methods to enhance the resilience of our framework in challenging acoustic conditions.  

> Table 6. Performance under noise and room reverberation: We employ our proposed architecture to infer under distinct scenarios, with and without noise (different SNR in dB levels) and and reverberation.

Noise Reverberation MAE (°) ↓ Median Error (°) ↓

✗ ✗ 25.72 13.00 

✗ ✓ 48.69 28.42 60dB ✓ 48.57 28.27 50dB ✓ 49.50 28.95 40dB ✓ 50.89 31.08 30dB ✗ 33.01 21.25 30dB ✓ 54.43 33.12 

# F. Performance on Different Datasets 

To assess the generalizability of our proposed spatial-aware ASR system, we evaluate its performance across multiple datasets, including our synthetically generated dataset based on LibriSpeech, as well as other speech datasets Common Voice (Ardila et al., 2019), VoxCeleb (Nagrani et al., 2017), and LJ Speech (Ito, 2017). Our results in Table 7 indicate that the model achieves the lowest MAE and Median Error, benefiting from the model trained using the same dataset. However, when tested on other datasets, the MAE and Median Error slightly increases as expected. Despite this, our system still outperforms existing baselines in spatial-aware ASR tasks, demonstrating its robustness and adaptability to different acoustic 14 SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables 

conditions. Other than speech, we also test the performance on audio dataset ESC-50 (Piczak, 2015), also shows robust performance as speech.  

> Table 7. Performance on Different Datasets: We evaluate our model across several datasets, reporting MAE and Median Error for DoA estimation.

Dataset MAE (°) ↓ Median Error (°) ↓

LibriSpeech (speech) 25.72 13.00 

Common Voice (speech) 53.34 32.11 VoxCeleb (speech) 41.22 25.80 LJ Speech (speech) 80.21 34.73 ESC-50 (audio) 49.99 24.65 

# G. 3D UMAP Visualization of Spatial Embeddings 

To evaluate the spatial embeddings derived from the DoA encoder, we utilized UMAP (Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection)(McInnes et al., 2018) to visualize their structure in a reduced-dimensional space. Figure 3 showcases the 3D UMAP visualizations, where the embeddings capture spatial cues from all angles, effectively encoding directional information. The clustering and angular organization of the points demonstrate the encoder’s capacity to represent spatial diversity and preserve the underlying spatial structure of the speech signals. This provides valuable insights into the model’s ability to generalize spatial features across multiple sound sources.  

> Figure 3. 3D UMAP visualization of spatial embeddings generated by the DoA encoder.

# H. Cumulative Distributive Analysis for different speech sources for SING 

We focus on analyzing the mean and median errors across varying conditions, illustrating our findings through comprehensive plots for clarity. Figure 10 shows the cumulative distribution function (CDF) plots for different speech sources. 15 SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables 

Figure 4. CDF for 1 DoA Figure 5. CDF for 2 DoAs 

Figure 6. CDF for 3 DoAs Figure 7. CDF for 4 DoAs 

Figure 8. CDF for 5 DoAs Figure 9. CDF for all speech sources 

Figure 10. CDF plots of absolute errors for different numbers of speech sources (DoAs). Mean and median errors are highlighted for comparison. 

16 SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables 

# I. Prompt Details 

To evaluate the capabilities of our Spatial-Aware ASR system, we design various prompts corresponding to different speech processing tasks. These prompts facilitate direction estimation, speaker counting, and transcription summarization, enabling a more comprehensive understanding of spatially distributed speech signals. 

Type System Prompts Prompts Response Templates 

ASR (Whisper) You are an assistant that pro-vides the summarization of the speech. Respond with the the correct summariza-tion. What is the summarization of the speech? Mr. Swift’s eyes twinkled. Spatial ASR (DoA + Whis-per) You are an assistant that pro-vides the direction of the speech in degrees and a sum-marization of the speech. Respond with the exact an-gle in degrees and the cor-rect summarization. What is the direction of speech in degrees and sum-marization of the speech? The speaker is speaking ap-proximately at angle 217 de-grees. The speech says: A low, deep moan broke from him. DoA Detection You are an assistant that identifies the direction of sound. Respond with the ex-act angle in degrees. What is the direction of the speech source? The speech is coming from 45 degrees. Number of Speakers You are an assistant that identifies how many people are speaking at the same time. Respond with the ex-act numbers. How many people are speak-ing? There are 3 speech sources. Multi-DoA Detection You are an assistant that identifies how many people are speaking at the same time and the directions of speech. Respond with the exact angle in degrees. How many people are speak-ing? What are the directions of the sound sources? There are 2 speech sources. Speech source 1’s degree of arrival is 39.0 degrees, and speech source 2’s degree of arrival is 101.0 degrees.  

> Table 8. Overview of different prompt types and their corresponding response templates in the Spatial-Aware ASR system. The system is capable of detecting speech direction, counting the number of speakers, and summarizing transcriptions.

# J. Performance of Number of Speakers Estimation 

We show the performance of number of speakers estimation from the num of speaker encoder. Figure 11 shows the normalized confusion matrix for the number of speakers’ estimation task, represented as ratios. Each cell indicates the proportion of predictions for a given actual class, normalized by the total number of samples in that class. The diagonal values highlight the model’s accuracy in correctly identifying the number of speakers, with values close to 1 indicating high precision. Off-diagonal values represent misclassifications, demonstrating the model’s tendency to confuse certain classes. For example, the model exhibits strong performance for classes 1, 2, 3, and 5, while class 4 shows more confusion with class 5, reflecting the challenges in differentiating between these scenarios. 

# K. Spectrogram of Recordings from Directions 

Figure 12 shows the difference between original speech and speech signals coming from angles, captured by the microphone built in microstructure. The differences in the spectrograms are evident in the amplitude and frequency distributions, which 17 SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables  

> Figure 11. Confusion matrix for number of speakers estimation.

vary significantly depending on the Direction of Arrival (DoA). For example, at angles 244° and 163°, the spectrograms display distinct patterns in the intensity and distribution of energy across frequencies compared to the original speech. These variations are introduced by the microstructure’s unique modulation of sound waves, which embeds direction-specific characteristics into the captured audio.  

> Figure 12. Comparison between original speech and speech captured from directions.

# L. Ablation Study for DoA Encoder Design 

To show an ablation study of our DoA encoder design, we compared the performance of designed DoA encoder that has a 3-layer CNN and a transformer-based DNN encoder as shown in table 9. This transformer-based DNN encoder was trained using the same architecture as Audio Spectrogram Transformer (Gong et al., 2021), which is a popular transformer architecture for audio. The mean DoA errors of CNN-based DoA encoder and transformer-based encoder are 11.00 and 17.08 respectively, showing the effectiveness of CNN-based encoder.      

> Model Mean DoA Error (°)
> SING 25.72 3-layer CNN 11.00 Audio Spectrogram Transformer 17.08
> Table 9. Mean DoA error for the evaluated models.

18 SING: Spatial Context in Large Language Model for Next-Gen Wearables    

> Figure 13. CDF for SING Figure 14. CDF for Owlet

# M. CNN-based Owlet Model 

Figure 13 and figure 14 shows the comparison of SING and Owlet model. Note that exact comparison is infeasible as Owlet processes the audio signal differently and does not attempt to retain in speech information. SING not only supports DoA estimation, but also retains speech features in the audio. 

# N. Embedding Instead of Numerical Values for Spatial Information 

While the proposed approach of using explicit numerical values (e.g., ”120°”) combined with transcribed speech and a prompt to generate structured outputs is viable for single-speaker scenarios, it faces significant scalability and robustness limitations in multi-speaker environments. In particular, multi-DoA scenarios involve multiple overlapping speakers and corresponding DoAs. Concatenating raw numbers or crafting ad-hoc prompts for each speaker-direction pair becomes increasingly brittle and complex as the number of speakers increases. Embedding-based representations are more scalable and generalizable, allowing us to encode both directional and contextual information in a unified vector space that the LLM can attend to and reason about. This enables the system to handle variable-length inputs, concurrent speakers, and noisy observations more robustly. 

# O. Latency, Power, and Memory for Real-time On-device Usage 

Our edge-cloud hybrid approach processes DoA and speech embeddings on-device, then transmits these small embeddings to the cloud for LLM inference. For comparison, the Whisper-tiny model uses 273 M B of memory, 75 M iB of disk usage, and 

< 500 ms latency. This model has been deployed on mobile devices (Gerganov, 2023). Our DoA encoder is considerably lighter: it achieves an average latency of 62 .93 ms per speech file. Memory usage per speech file is 50 M B , and drops to 

16 M B when using the quantized model. During full inference, the overall memory footprint is 741 .42 M B . These results demonstrate that our method is well-suited for on-device processing in wearable or embedded systems, where both memory and power are constrained. Table 10 summarizes the latency, memory, and disk requirements for real-time on -device processing of speech embeddings, alongside the Whisper-tiny baseline.                               

> System / Model Latency Memory Disk Full Inf. Notes
> (ms/file) (MB) (MB) Footprint (MB) Whisper-tiny <500 273 75 –Deployed on mobile devices DoA Encoder (full precision) 62.93 50 –741.42 On -device embedding +cloud LLM pipeline DoA Encoder (quantized) 62.93 16 ––Quantized on-device model
> Table 10. Latency, memory, and disk requirements for real -time on -device processing of speech embeddings (compared to Whisper -tiny).

19