Title: Privacy-preserving Prosody Representation Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.00407v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 00:30:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# Privacy-preserving Prosody Representation Learning 

Kevin Everson, Mari Ostendorf 

Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Washington 

{kpever, ostendor }@uw.edu 

Abstract 

Speech representations that capture prosodic in-formation can be useful for both understanding and generation. However, speaker characteris-tics are reflected in acoustic-prosodic features (e.g., pitch). To address privacy concerns from the leakage of identity information, we pro-pose a new self-supervised approach to learn-ing prosody representations that incorporates speaker disentanglement strategies. We eval-uate our encoder on three tasks to probe rep-resentation capabilities, including pitch recon-struction and detection of different prosodic events. Our encoder outperforms raw prosody and HuBERT-base baselines, achieving strong speaker disentanglement without adverse im-pact on prosody-related downstream tasks. 

1 Introduction 

Prosody broadly refers to the aspects of speech which complement the lexical content, conveying intent-related or paralinguistic information. For ex-ample, local variations in pitch and energy, pausing, and duration lengthening can be used to communi-cate information focus, sarcasm, self-corrections, or the difference between a statement and a question. A wider pitch range and faster speaking rate can express excitement. Representing prosodic infor-mation is essential for both speech generation and understanding, whether explicitly or implicitly in vector space models. In this work, we introduce an explicit representation of prosody that aims to dis-entangle prosody from lexical content and speaker information, motivated by the need for more reli-able understanding and generation of expressive speech and the desire for privacy-preserving speech processing systems. Early computational work on prosody focused on acoustic cues such as fundamental frequency (F0), energy, and duration statistics, using speaker and phoneme normalization to remove speaker and lexical content information. Challenges with this approach are that automatic phonetic time align-ment and F0 extraction algorithms are not very reliable, and energy is sensitive to recording con-ditions. More recently, researchers have explored self-supervised learning approaches, but often the objective of speaker disentanglement is lost. Acoustic-prosodic cues are known to carry speaker information. When it is not removed, users are made vulnerable to serious privacy breaches, such as identity theft via deepfake generation. Con-cerns over these vulnerabilities are exacerbated by the proliferation of speech-based AI assistants and the ever-improving model capabilities. Thus, the disentanglement of speaker characteristics is es-sential for protecting user privacy in cases where identity information is not needed. To this end, we train a prosody encoder by dis-tilling information from acoustic-prosodic features via self-supervised learning, leveraging input fea-tures that disentangle lexical content and a learn-ing framework for disentangling speaker informa-tion via target normalization and an adversarial loss function. We evaluate the efficacy of our prosody representation on three tasks: a standard pitch re-construction task, as well as prosodic prominence and phrase boundary detection. The speaker identi-fication task is used to assess our speaker disentan-glement techniques. Our findings indicate that our encoder yields improved prosody modeling over baselines and that speaker information leakage can be effectively diminished without a negative impact on prosody modeling. 

2 Related Work 

While there have been a number of prosody repre-sentation models developed for specific tasks, e.g. speech synthesis, emotion recognion, and speech understanding tasks, this work focuses on the use of self-supervised learning with untranscribed speech to provide a general representation of prosody. In 

> arXiv:2606.00407v1 [eess.AS] 29 May 2026

addition, we are interested in frame-based repre-sentations, since they allow the flexibility of using different levels (e.g. phone, word) via pooling. Standard acoustic modeling approaches used in speech recognition (e.g. HuBERT (Hsu et al., 2021), wav2vec 2.0 (Baevski et al., 2020)) have proved to be useful for some prosody tasks (Lin et al., 2023), but recently there have been a few efforts to more explicitly target prosodic character-istics of speech. In particular, our work builds on ProsodyBERT (Hu et al., 2023) and PE-Wav2vec (Liu et al., 2024). As in ProsodyBERT, we use a HuBERT architecture with hidden units produced by acoustic-prosodic cues, and augment the stan-dard masked prediction loss with a span boundary loss. However, like PE-Wav2vec, we use the esti-mated glottal waveform as input, rather than raw prosody features. Different from both, we intro-duce speaker disentanglement strategies, including speaker-normalization of the prosody features used for masked prediction targets and an adversarial speaker loss function. Other examples of speaker disentanglement in prosody representation learning include information bottlenecks (Qian et al., 2020), pitch-shifting the audio input (Weston et al., 2021), and adversarial losses (Qu et al., 2025). Prosody representations have been evaluated in speech synthesis (or voice conversion), intent recog-nition (sentiment, sarcasm, persuasiveness), and paralinguistic tasks (emotion recognition, health di-agnostics). Prosody benchmarks include SUPERB-prosody (Lin et al., 2023) and DAMMP (Weston et al., 2021). Since we are interested in representa-tion of linguistic (rather than paralinguistic) struc-ture, we use prosodic event detection tasks, but also report on the pitch reconstruction task in SUPERB-prosody. Speaker disentanglement is most often evaluated with objective measures such as speaker identification or verification tasks (Lian et al., 2022; Qian et al., 2019), or subjective assessments of source speaker characteristics present in generated speech (Deng et al., 2024; Qian et al., 2020). In this study, we use speaker identification. 

3 Prosody Encoder 

Our prosody encoder architecture, shown in Fig. 1, is inspired by ProsodyBERT (Hu et al., 2023), which follows HuBERT’s approach to self-supervised learning (Hsu et al., 2021) but adds a span-based objective to encourage learning of suprasegmental characteristics. Key differences of our work include: i) use of the estimated glottal waveform as input, and ii) addition of an adversar-ial speaker identification loss term.    

> Figure 1: Prosody encoder pretraining, which uses a masked-prediction objective Lmp and a span-boundary objective Lsb .

3.1 Model details 

Our prosody encoder shares an architecture with HuBERT-base, consisting of a convolutional input module followed by a transformer. 

Input. The model input is created using glottal source estimation, which is more robust and compu-tationally efficient than pitch tracking, and captures voice quality information. We extract the glottal source by inverse-filtering with estimated LPC coef-ficients (Rabiner and Schafer, 2010) (filter order 16, 25ms window, 10ms stride). In some frames with very low energy (non-speech regions), we find that the coefficients produced by LPC were unreliable, leading to input artifacts and training instability. To alleviate this issue, we simply return the raw wave-form in frames with energy less than 10 −4 rather than applying the inverse-filter. A 1 kHz low-pass filter is then applied, yielding the final model input. In anecdotal listening experiments, we find that this low-pass filter reduces lexical information leakage. 

Hidden units. Similar to Hu et al. (2023), hid-den units Z = ( z1, ..., zT ) are produced via offline 

k-means clustering of acoustic-prosodic feature vec-tors [P, log F0, ∆ log F0, c1], where: 

• P (periodicity) indicates the frame-level prob-ability of voiced speech; 

• log F0, normalized by subtracting a speaker’s mean log-pitch, where a speaker’s mean log-pitch is computed as a weighted average over 

log F0 using P as weights; 

• ∆ log F0; and 

• c1, the first mel-frequency cepstral coefficient, representing the overall slope of the spectrum. Unlike Hu et al. (2023), we normalize F0 features to support speaker disentanglement. c1 is used in place of energy to reduce sensitivity to factors such as recording conditions. Before clustering, we ap-ply corpus-level z-normalization to each feature. 

3.2 Self-supervised learning objective 

The training loss function is the weighted sum: 

L = Lmp + αsb Lsb + αadv spk Ladv spk ,

with hyperparameters αsb and αadv spk .The first component, Lmp , is the standard frame-level masked-prediction objective. For index i in a masked span starting at index j and ending at index k, a linear layer produces frame-level distri-butions over the k hidden unit labels. The masked-prediction objective given by the cross-entropy: 

Lmp = log pmp (zi | yi),

where Y is the transformer output when randomly sampled spans of the convolutional encoder output are masked. We use the same span-level masking algorithm introduced in Hsu et al. (2021). To encourage learning of suprasegmental pat-terns, we add a span boundary objective (Joshi et al., 2020). Specifically, we add a linear layer to predict the frame-level hidden unit at masked index i, given the nearest unmasked frames on the left and right (at j − 1 and k + 1 , respectively), as well as the dis-tance (in frames) from i to each. The span boundary objective is also given by the cross-entropy: 

Lsb = log psb (zi | yj−1, yk+1 , i − j + 1 , k + 1 − i).

Lastly, we include an adversarial speaker iden-tification objective Ladv spk . The frame-level features 

yi are passed to a gradient-reversal layer, then pro-jected via a linear prediction layer to produce a distribution over speaker labels: 

Ladv spk = log pspk (spk |yi).

Due to the gradient reversal layer, the linear pre-diction parameters are updated in the direction that minimizes Ladv spk , while the encoder parameters are updated in the opposite direction. The prosody encoder is trained on the transcribed portion of the GigaSpeech corpus (Chen et al., 2021), containing 11 K hours of English-language spontaneous and read speech from YouTube, pod-casts, and audiobooks. Since speaker labels are not provided, we use pseudo-labels created by extract-ing utterance-level embeddings from a pretrained speaker encoder, then clustering with 1000 clusters per (Malinen and Fr ¨anti, 2025). Pitch and period-icity are extracted with torchcrepe . We train using the fairseq toolkit on four NVIDIA (A40 or L40) GPUs for 500 K steps, with a variable batch size averaging ∼30 per GPU 1. The checkpoint with the lowest validation loss is frozen and used for downstream tasks. 

4 Experiments and Results 

We evaluate the encoder on a series of downstream tasks to assess its prosody modeling capacity and speaker disentanglement. The (frozen) encoder fea-tures are input to a task-specific model, which is fine-tuned on a single A40 or L40 GPU using the 

s3prl toolkit 2. In line with our efforts to preserve privacy, we use only the final encoder output layer, in contrast to other SUPERB-based (Yang et al., 2021) setups, which use all intermediate layers. All reported results are on test splits, using the best checkpoint based on development splits. 

4.1 Evaluation models 

The proposed prosody encoder is compared to two baselines: the standard pretrained HuBERT-base model and the raw speaker-normalized prosody feature vectors ( [P, log F0, ∆ log F0, c1]). For ab-lations, we train versions of our proposed prosody encoder without the adversarial speaker loss and without the speaker normalization of log F0 when producing hidden units. 

> 1github.com/kpeverson/speaker disentangled prosody
> 2github.com/kpeverson/s3prl tobi

such supervision | according to ash | is a sensible | cost effective alternative | to incarceration | 

> Figure 2: Prosody event example: “—” indicates a phrase boundary; highlighted text indicates prominent syllables.

4.2 Prosody prediction evaluations 

In addition to the standard pitch reconstruction task, we evaluate on two prosodic event detection tasks, chosen because the self-supervised learning ap-proach was designed with the goal of characterizing linguistic (vs. paralinguistic) prosodic information. 

Pitch reconstruction. We evaluate on the Lib-riTTS (Zen et al., 2019) pitch reconstruction task us-ing the setup and splits from SUPERB-prosody (Lin et al., 2023). After extracting frame-level F0 of-fline using pYAAPT , log F0 is predicted over voiced frames from the prosody encoder features using a linear layer. Mean-squared error (MSE) is used as the training objective and reported metric. Since average pitch varies with speaker and we aim to remove speaker information, we also include a modified evaluation in which the predicted and ground-truth log F0 contours are shifted to 0-mean. 

Phrase boundary detection. We introduce two tasks from the BU Radio Corpus (Ostendorf et al., 1995), containing 11 hours of read speech from seven professional radio announcers with word- and phoneme-level forced alignments, plus ToBI an-nonations (Beckman and Hirschberg, 1994) which include break index labels with word boundary timestamps. The corpus is partitioned such that 

∼80 /10 /10% of each speaker’s files are present in the training, development, and test splits, respec-tively. We detect full phrase boundaries (i.e. words with “ 4” break index labels, as indicated by “—” symbols in Fig. 2) from prosody features within 

±100 ms of each word boundary. Because changes in prosody can indicate phrase boundaries, we sep-arately pool (via self-attention) the features before and after the timestamp, and concatenate the two resulting vectors before applying the classifier. This task is trained using cross-entropy loss, and evalu-ated using F1 score and accuracy. 

Syllable prominence detection. The tone tier of the BU Radio Corpus ToBI annotations includes timestamps of accented syllables (containing “*” labels, indicated by highlighted text in Fig. 2). To detect these, we pool the frame-level features from each syllable using self-attention and apply a linear classification layer to the syllable-level features. We use the same splits as in the phrase boundary detec-tion task, and again use cross-entropy loss as the training objective and evaluate on F1 and accuracy. 

4.3 Speaker disentanglement evaluation 

To evaluate the amount of speaker information cap-tured by our prosody modeling and the efficacy of our disentanglement methods, we also fine-tune on the VoxCeleb1 (Nagrani et al., 2017) speaker identification task. 

4.4 Results and discussion 

Results on the prosody modeling evaluations are reported in Table 1. Among the baseline systems, HuBERT-base achieves stronger results despite the lack of prosody-specific training strategies. The variants of our encoder outperform the baselines. The advantage of our system is greatest on the sylla-ble prominence detection task, achieving a relative F1 improvement of 15% over HuBERT-base. Notably, the use of speaker-normalized log F0

and the adversarial speaker objective together did not adversely affect downstream task performance; other than the variant with the adversarial speaker objective and without speaker-normalization of 

log F0, the variants achieved similarly strong results on the ToBI detection tasks. At the same time, the variant with both speaker-disentanglement strate-gies performed the best in the 0-mean pitch recon-struction setup, indicating the strongest modeling of local pitch dynamics. The speaker identification (SID) results on the VoxCeleb1 test set are shown in Table 2. We note that the accuracy of our HuBERT-base implemen-tation is lower than the 0.81 reported in Yang et al. (2021), since we only use the outputs of the final layer. Our prosody encoder variants indicate much less speaker information (lower SID accuracy) than HuBERT-base, and disentanglement strategies fur-ther diminish the speaker information. In terms of SID accuracy, the adversarial objective yields a 46% relative reduction, and the two strategies together yield a 66% relative reduction. 

5 Conclusion 

We propose a prosody encoder that takes the es-timated glottal source as input, and is trained to Speaker- ToBI detection tasks Pitch recons. 

norm. Ladv spk 

Phrase boundary Syl. prominence Standard 0-mean 

Model log F0 F1 ( ↑) acc. ( ↑) F1 ( ↑) acc. ( ↑) MSE ( ↓) MSE ( ↓)

most freq. class − − 0.00 0.87 0.00 0.70 − −

HuBERT-base − ✗ 0.79 0.95 0.74 0.85 0.056 0.011 

Raw prosody ✓ − 0.49 0.88 0.66 0.83 − −

Ours 

✗ ✗ 0.82 0.95 0.86 0.92 0.027 0.012 

✓ ✗ 0.82 0.95 0.86 0.92 0.048 0.012 

✗ ✓ 0.73 0.93 0.82 0.89 0.024 0.012 

✓ ✓ 0.82 0.95 0.85 0.91 0.025 0.008   

> Table 1: Prosody modeling test evaluation results.

Speaker-norm. Ladv spk 

Accuracy 

Model log F0 (↓)HuBERT-base − ✗ 0.64 

Ours 

✗ ✗ 0.41 

✓ ✗ 0.42 

✗ ✓ 0.22 

✓ ✓ 0.14   

> Table 2: VoxCeleb1 test speaker identification results.

predict hidden units produced from raw acoustic-prosodic features. Disentanglement techniques are employed to reduce the amount of speaker infor-mation present in the output features. Our findings indicate that prosody modeling is not negatively af-fected by these speaker disentanglement techniques, an encouraging result given the dual importance of capturing the intent-related information conveyed by prosody while protecting user privacy. 

6 Limitations 

We use pseudo-labels from utterance-level speaker embeddings, which places limitations on speaker-normalization of log F0 and the adversarial speaker objective. Ground-truth labels would likely be more effective. Chen et al. (2021) indicated plans to up-date the Gigaspeech corpus metadata with speaker information, but this has not yet been released. The assessment of the representation learning approach is limited in a few respects. We focused primarily on local prosodic events, but it may be useful to also evaluate on paralinguistic tasks. For comparison to prior work, the understanding tasks leverage hand transcriptions. Evaluation with au-tomatically recognized transcripts would be more informative but would require a more sophisticated scoring algorithm. It would also be useful to evalu-ate on a speech generation task, which would pro-vide an opportunity for subjective human assess-ments. Our model is not causal, which is needed for streaming generation scenarios, but translation of our approach to a causal framework is straight-forward. Comparisons to existing prosody models, namely ProsodyBERT (Hu et al., 2023) and PE-Wav2Vec (Liu et al., 2024), were limited due to lack of pub-licly available code. Our attempts to train similar models resulted in uncompetitive performance on downstream tasks. 

7 Ethical considerations 

The ethical concern of protecting privacy is an im-portant consideration in the development of this model. Our approach was developed assuming rel-atively small amounts of data are available for a speaker. It is possible that speaker recognition algo-rithms could be developed that are effective given larger amounts of data. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the Intelligence Ad-vanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via Department of Interior/Interior Business Center (DOI/IBC) contract number 140D0424C0070. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and dis-tribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwith-standing any copyright annotation thereon. Dis-claimer: The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or im-plied, of IARPA, DOI/IBC, or the U.S. Govern-ment. References 

Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. 2020. wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations. 

Advances in neural information processing systems ,33:12449–12460. Mary E Beckman and Julia Hirschberg. 1994. The ToBI Annotation Conventions. Ohio State University .Guoguo Chen, Shuzhou Chai, Guan-Bo Wang, Jiayu Du, Wei-Qiang Zhang, Chao Weng, Dan Su, Daniel Povey, Jan Trmal, Junbo Zhang, and 1 others. 2021. GigaSpeech: An Evolving, Multi-Domain ASR Cor-pus with 10,000 Hours of Transcribed Audio. Inter-speech 2021 .Yimin Deng, Jianzong Wang, Xulong Zhang, Ning Cheng, and Jing Xiao. 2024. Learning Expres-sive Disentangled Speech Representations with Soft Speech Units and Adversarial Style Augmentation. In 2024 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pages 1–7. IEEE. Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Abdel-rahman Mohamed. 2021. HuBERT: Self-Supervised Speech Representation learning by Masked Prediction of Hidden Units. IEEE/ACM transactions on audio, speech, and language processing , 29:3451–3460. Yushi Hu, Chunlei Zhang, Jiatong Shi, Jiachen Lian, Mari Ostendorf, and Dong Yu. 2023. ProsodyBERT: Self-Supervised Prosody Representation for Style-Controllable TTS. Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Yinhan Liu, Daniel S. Weld, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy. 2020. SpanBERT: Improving Pre-training by Representing and Predict-ing Spans. Transactions of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics , 8:64–77. Place: Cambridge, MA Publisher: MIT Press. Jiachen Lian, Chunlei Zhang, and Dong Yu. 2022. Ro-bust Disentangled Variational Speech Representation Learning for Zero-shot Voice Conversion. In ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acous-tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 6572–6576. IEEE. Guan-Ting Lin, Chi-Luen Feng, Wei-Ping Huang, Yuan Tseng, Tzu-Han Lin, Chen-An Li, Hung-yi Lee, and Nigel G Ward. 2023. On the Utility of Self-supervised models for Prosody-related Tasks. In 2022 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT) , pages 1104–1111. IEEE. Zhao-Ci Liu, Liping Chen, Ya-Jun Hu, Zhen-Hua Ling, and Jia Pan. 2024. PE-Wav2vec: A Prosody-Enhanced Speech Model for Self-Supervised Prosody Learning in TTS. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , 32:4199–4210. Mikko I. Malinen and Pasi Fr ¨anti. 2025. Fixed-sized clusters k-Means. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2501.16113 [cs]. Arsha Nagrani, Joon Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman. 2017. VoxCeleb: A Large-Scale Speaker Identifica-tion Dataset. In Interspeech 2017 , interspeech2017. ISCA. Mari Ostendorf, Patti J Price, and Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel. 1995. The Boston University Radio News Corpus. Linguistic Data Consortium , pages 1–19. Kaizhi Qian, Yang Zhang, Shiyu Chang, Mark Hasegawa-Johnson, and David Cox. 2020. Unsuper-vised Speech Decomposition via Triple Information Bottleneck. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 7836–7846. PMLR. Kaizhi Qian, Yang Zhang, Shiyu Chang, Xuesong Yang, and Mark Hasegawa-Johnson. 2019. AutoVC: Zero-Shot Voice Style Transfer with Only Autoencoder Loss. In Proceedings of the 36th International Confer-ence on Machine Learning , volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 5210–5219. PMLR. Leyuan Qu, Cornelius Weber, Wei Wang, Jia Jin, Ying-ming Gao, Taihao Li, and Stefan Wermter. 2025. Dis-entanglement of Prosody Representations via Diffu-sion Models and Scheduled Gradient Reversal. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Sys-tems , 36(8):15043–15054. Lawrence Rabiner and Ronald Schafer. 2010. Theory and Applications of Digital Speech Processing . Pren-tice Hall Press. Jack Weston, Raphael Lenain, Udeepa Meepegama, and Emil Fristed. 2021. Learning De-identified Repre-sentations of Prosody from Raw Audio. In Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , pages 11134–11145. PMLR. Shu-wen Yang, Po-Han Chi, Yung-Sung Chuang, Cheng-I Jeff Lai, Kushal Lakhotia, Yist Y Lin, Andy T Liu, Jiatong Shi, Xuankai Chang, Guan-Ting Lin, and 1 others. 2021. SUPERB: Speech Processing Universal PERformance Benchmark. In Proc. Interspeech 2021 ,pages 1194–1198. Heiga Zen, Viet Dang, Rob Clark, Yu Zhang, Ron J Weiss, Ye Jia, Zhifeng Chen, and Yonghui Wu. 2019. LibriTTS: A Corpus Derived from LibriSpeech for Text-to-Speech. In Proc. Interspeech 2019 , pages 1526–1530.