Title: Ouvia: A User-centered Framework for Measuring Usability of Speech Translation in Real-World Communication Scenarios

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.06177v1

Published Time: Fri, 05 Jun 2026 01:30:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# OUVIA : A User-centered Framework for Measuring Usability of Speech Translation in Real-World Communication Scenarios 

Giuseppe Attanasio Λ, Beatrice Savoldi Φ, Daniel Chechelnitsky Π

Matteo Negri Φ, Marine Carpuat Υ, Maarten Sap Π, André F.T. Martins ΣΛ T 

> Λ

Instituto de Telecomunicações, Φ Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Π Carnegie Mellon University  

> Υ

University of Maryland, Σ Instituto Superior Técnico, T TransPerfect 

giuseppe.attanasio@lx.it.pt 

Abstract 

Speech translation (ST) is increasingly adopted in user applications, yet its evaluation largely focuses on decontextualized testbeds and holis-tic quality, rather than end users’ communica-tion needs. We introduce O UVIA , an evalua-tion framework for measuring user-perceived 

usability of speech translation outputs in real-world settings. OUVIA focuses on one-to-one communication: an English speaker needs to convey a request to a Portuguese speaker, and the message is automatically translated. Through a custom web app and multi-phase study design, we collect more than 1,750 such interactions in healthcare and everyday situa-tions, mediated by four ST systems, involving speakers from three English dialects and two genders. We find that modern ST serves people only to a limited extent—only around half of in-teractions are rated as usable—with significant gaps in reported usability across demographic groups. Moreover, among quality metrics, we find that QA-based evaluation is a substantially stronger predictor of real-world usability than standard approaches. Together, these findings stress the importance of situated, user-centered evaluation frameworks that go beyond holistic quality scores and attend to who the technology serves—and how well. 1

1 Introduction 

Speech translation now underpins a broad range of user-facing applications, from cross-lingual real-time conferencing to software for multilingual ed-ucation 2 or clinical healthcare triage. 3 A key cata-lyst of this progress is the field’s ability to evaluate 

translation systems rigorously, whether through tar-geted evaluation campaigns (Salesky et al., 2025) or scalable automatic quality metrics (e.g., Rei et al., 2022; Han et al., 2024; Juraska et al., 2025).  

> 1Study platform and data under CC-BY 4.0 at https: //github.com/g8a9/ouvia .
> 2https://www.wordly.ai/education-translation
> 3https://www.caretotranslate.com/

While laudable, these efforts address only a fraction of what evaluation demands. Campaigns typically run in vitro : they present decontextual-ized (non-situated) test segments to participants and treat quality as a holistic concept—detached from function and purpose (Colina, 2009; Liu et al., 2024) and primarily serving system performance tracking and ranking rather than actual real-world use. Moreover, automatic quality assessments tell little about ramifications—e.g., whether bad trans-lations imply clinical risk (Khoong et al., 2019), or quality gaps reflect real-world allocative harms (Savoldi et al., 2024)—and risks amplifying social biases (Zaranis et al., 2025). Purely automatic, de-contextualized, holistic evaluation cannot be the sole end. It should, instead, be supported by new forms of inquiries, centered around end-users— to-day, largely laypeople (Nurminen, 2021)—their communication needs, and real-world uses and sit-uations (Savoldi et al., 2025; Carpuat et al., 2025). This paper introduces O UVIA ,4 an evaluation framework for capturing user-perceived usability 

of speech translation systems in real-world commu-nication scenarios. We pursue three overarching goals: (1) capture lay users’ perceptions of the us-ability of translation outputs across different high-and low-stakes situations; (2) measure whether speaker dialect and gender identity give rise to gaps in translation quality and usability, and how these relate; (3) investigate the predictive power of (au-tomatic) quality metrics for usability, and charac-terize the practical implications of metric choice. OUVIA bundles the following contributions: 

A conceptual evaluation framework that moves ST evaluation from decontextualized testbeds to situated, user-centered assessment. We devise a multi-phase protocol that mimics ST-mediated one-to-one interactions (see Figure 1): a sender initiates a conversation with an English  

> 4Past tense of Portuguese ouvir , to hear.

1

> arXiv:2606.06177v1 [cs.CL] 4 Jun 2026

Receiver  pt                                    

> "Hi, I’ve had a persistent rash on my arms and
> torso for fi ve days . […] I took Benadryl twice
> daily for two days . I also used hydrocortisone
> cream once, but no improvement. […] I have a
> history of eczema and am worried it’s a fl are-up."
> For how many days has the
> person had symptoms? *
> What was the dosage of
> Benadryl the person took? *
> pt
> QA Task
> 3
> en
> Based on the pt translation
> *Questions are in Pt

Validator          

> 4
> Survey
> Iwould use this AI translation in areal-
> world situation.
> 2
> Based on:
> DA+SQM
> Speech
> Translation
> Model

Sender  en      

> 1
> Receives feedback from
> Q1.
> Q2.
> 0100
> QA Validation
> Q1. Q2.
> 3

Figure 1: Study Workflow. 1 : A English-speaking sender reads aloud and records a conversation starter, which we translate with a speech translation system. 2 : A L1 Portuguese receiver answers up to 10 open-text questions about the translated text. 3 : A validator, fluent in both languages, assesses translation quality and flags the questions answered incorrectly in 2 . 4 : the initial sender rates their perceived usability compounding satisfaction, trust, and reliance in two time points: first based on the translation from 1 , then with the additional outcomes from 3 .

request, which is automatically translated for a Por-tuguese receiver who answers comprehension ques-tions based on the translation. A third bilingual 

validator annotates the exchange with quality sig-nals. Finally, the sender is surveyed on several dimensions of usability. This design captures what in-vitro evaluation cannot: whether a translation is 

usable for a specific person, in a specific situation, to accomplish a specific communicative goal. 

A user study, data, and findings. We imple-ment the framework through a user study grounded in English-to-Portuguese translation in Portugal—a highly multicultural country where large segments of the immigrant population rely on English as a 

lingua franca (AIMA, 2025). We recruit native En-glish speakers across different dialects (Koenecke et al., 2020) and Hindi speakers as a non-native group—the largest migrant population in Portugal after Brazilians and the fastest-growing, for whom mediated translation is particularly relevant. We collect N = 1 ,738 subjective judgments from 174 

unique speakers on translations from four state-of-the-art ST systems across healthcare and everyday scenarios. Our findings show that current sys-tems serve real-world users only to a limited ex-tent , that usability gaps exist across speaker de-mographics , and that QA-based evaluation pre-dicts usability substantially better than standard coarse-grained metrics —reinforcing the need for situated, user-centered evaluation of ST. 

A custom web platform and speech corpus. To run the study, we develop a web platform support-ing speech recordings and multi-user interactions. To support future research, we release 14 .6 hours of prompted speech recordings, 13 .8K+ human anno-tations for QA-based quality evaluation, and 1.7K+ translation quality scores. 

2 Study Design 

We focus on communication scenarios (Hovy et al., 2002): a speaker wants to correctly convey a mes-sage to someone in a different language. In this setting, correctness might not necessarily mean generic translation quality. Rather, the exchange might be successful “as long as people get the in-formation they want, [. . . ] or manage to convey their intentions” (Hutchins, 2005). To study this at scale, we approximate such an interaction through an online study with a novel multi-phase design. Besides the core participants in the exchange, we additionally enlist a third-party bilingual validator to independently assess the correctness and quality of the translation mediating the exchange. 

2.1 Workflow 

Each study unit consists of four sequential phases. 

Phase 1 . A sender records a passage we col-lected (§2.2). This conversation starter is 40-60 2words long and contains key information, such as named entities or quantities, that a system should translate correctly (see bold phrases in Figure 1). 

Phase 2 . We translate the sender’s recording automatically and show the outcome to a receiver ,asking them to reply to a set of open-ended ques-tions grounded in the original passage. (§2.3). 

Phase 3 . We recruit a bilingual validator to verify the translation in two ways. (i) A direct as-sessment score (Graham et al., 2013)—Direct As-sessment with Scalar Quality Metrics (Kocmi et al., 2022, DA+SQM)—where we provide a slider from 0 to 100, marked with seven labeled tick marks indicating different quality labels that capture ac-curacy and grammatical correctness (details in Ap-pendix B.3). (ii) An assessment for each question indicating if the receiver answered it correctly. 

Phase 4 . We give the automatic translation to the initial sender and task them with a survey to col-lect their subjective judgments about the translation. Specifically, they rate their agreement on a 5-point scale (1 = Strongly Disagree, 5 = Strongly Agree) with statements aimed to assess: i) satisfaction per-ceived with the translation output (adapted from Basoah et al. (2025)); ii) trust , the belief that the output will be beneficial (adapted from Hoffman et al. (2023)); and iii) reliance , the self-reported behavioral intention to depend on the output in prac-tice (adapted from McGrath et al. (2025)). 5 Cru-cially, we encourage them to answer as if they were in a real-life situation needing to communicate with someone who speaks Portuguese. Together, these judgments provide a situated indication of three dimensions of a translation usability (§3). 6

Since senders do not speak Portuguese, we ad-minister the survey at two time points. First, we capture their baseline—their unconditioned ten-dency toward the translation usability based solely on the source passage, their recording, and the Por-tuguese translation they cannot linguistically ver-ify. Upon completion, we disclose the outcomes of Phases 2 and 3 , enabling senders to make another, but informed, final judgment.      

> 5The exact statements are: i) “I am satisfied with the quality of the AI translation”; ii) “I trust the AI translation to convey my message”; iii) : “I would use this AI translation in a real-world situation”.
> 6Although usability is traditionally defined in HCI as the effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction with which users achieve goals with a specific system (ISO, 2018), here we use it more broadly to capture how useful a user finds a translation in a given communicative context.

2.2 Compiling Starters 

For a realistic condition in 1 , we aim for conversa-tion starters that are truthful in content and style to real-life interactions, are of high quality, and cover both high- and low-stake scenarios. Moreover, we prioritize information-dense starters, i.e., passages that include multiple key information. To increase diversity, starter data are sampled from existing corpora as well as automatically generated. We confirm their quality via a manual validation, as described in Appendix B.2. 7

Healthcare Scenarios. We target the healthcare domain, where automatic translation finds frequent use (Genovese et al., 2024) and errors have pro-found ramifications (Taira et al., 2021). We sample entries from MED-MT (Fareez et al., 2022). The dataset contains transcripts of simulated patient-physician interviews, primarily focusing on respi-ratory cases. Since the original transcripts con-tain filled pauses and disfluencies, we use Gemini 2.5 Pro to strip them and improve fluency without changing the core content. To increase content and style diversity, prompted Qwen 3 32B and Gemini Pro 2.5 to create over-the-counter pharmacy con-versation starters, which mentions to symptoms, their duration, medication names, and allergies. 

Everyday Scenarios. We source customer re-quests from BConTrasT (Farajian et al., 2020), which consists of customer support dialogues. As in the healthcare case, we collect synthetic LLM-generated starters expressing requests about every-day scenarios, such as booking a taxi, banking re-quests, or hotel check-in. Overall, we sample 50 items each from both MT-MED and BConTrasT and generate 100 samples per domain (50 from each LLM), collecting a to-tal of 300 unique conversation starters. Appendix Table 3 reports examples and statistics. 

2.3 Compiling Questions 

Largely inspired by translation evaluation via ques-tion answering (Ki et al., 2025a), we automati-cally generate up to 10 unique questions for each starter. Following Fernandes et al. (2025), who show improved question relevance when generat-ing in English, we generate questions in English before translating them into Portuguese. For both generation and translation steps, we use Gemini 2.5 Pro, prompting the model to ground the question 

> 7See Appendix B.1 for full details on automatic data clean-ing and generation of both high- and low-stakes sets.

3in the starter’s main information (see an example in Figure 1, 2 ). See Appendix Figure 8 and 7 for the prompt used. We validate quality, as reported in Appendix B.2. Out of 200 questions, only one was answerable. Errors are thus extremely rare, but we account for them in the validation stage of our study: receivers can flag questions as unanswerable and validators can accept this as correct. 

2.4 Speech Translation Systems 

We experiment with four translation systems based on open-weight models that are currently state of the art (Papi et al., 2025). We include three di-rect speech translation models, Phi 4 Multimodal (Abouelenin et al., 2025), Voxtral Small (Liu et al., 2025), and DesTA2 (Lu et al., 2025), and one cas-caded system that uses Whisper large-v3 (Radford et al., 2023) to transcribe the recordings followed by Tower+ 9B (Rei et al., 2025), a strong lan-guage model specialized for translation in Euro-pean languages. After a sender completes 1 , we pick randomly one translation system using de-fault inference parameters and prompts to avoid introducing confounders. See generation details in Appendix B.4. 

2.5 Participant Recruitment 

We recruited study participants on Prolific. 8. We require the first language of receivers to be Por-tuguese and proficiency in both English and Por-tuguese for validators . To explore the impact of native English dialects and non-native accented speech, we recruited senders from three language groups based on (self-declared) nationality and eth-nic group: 9 (1) US White and (2) US Black speak-ers, whose first language is English, and (3) Hindi native speakers, who are proficient in English as a second language. Within each group, we bal-anced participants by gender identity. Using the platform’s filters, we select “Man” and “Woman.” 10 

Since 21% of the senders dropped out of the study (Phases 1 and 4 were, on average, six days apart), we recruited replacement participants only to complete the survey in 4 . We saw no significant difference between third- and first-person survey scores (see Appendix A.1 for details).                                        

> 8https://www.prolific.com/ . See Appendix A for details on recruitment.
> 9We acknowledge “ethnicity” is a fraught concept, but use it to match the screening filters available on Prolific.
> 10 We discuss the motivations and implications of this binary setup in Ethical Considerations. STRμ(u)σ(u)∆u
> US W3.91 3.84 3.86 3.87 1.15 -0.19 b⌋4.11 4.05 4.01 4.06 0.86 US B3.50 3.48 3.46 3.48 1.18 -0.20 b⌋3.7 3.66 3.69 3.68 0.91 Hindi 3.40 3.36 3.31 3.35 1.20 -0.40 b⌋3.78 3.74 3.75 3.76 0.88

Table 1: 5-point Likert usability scores by language group. S atisfaction, Trust, and Reliance are averaged into a composite score u; we report the group mean 

μ(u), standard deviation σ(u), and mean shift relative to u in the baseline condition ( ∆u). Baseline (b⌋) scores beneath each group. 

2.5.1 Participant-Task Assignment 

For senders, we use a between-subjects design with respect to group membership (Charness et al., 2012): each participant belongs to exactly one language-by-gender combination, with 30 partic-ipants recruited per cell. Cell sizes were deter-mined to support adequately powered comparisons (Brysbaert, 2019). The stimuli (starters) are shared across all groups, enabling both within- and across-group comparisons. Each participant is assigned 10 starters, stratified across domain (healthcare, mun-dane), source type (synthetic, natural), and model. Stratified assignment preserves internal validity by ensuring no individual participant is disproportion-ately exposed to any domain or model, thus pre-venting individual biases. For receivers, we recruit 20 participants per language group and randomly assign them 30 translations each. Similarly, we recruit 20 participants who each validate 30 ex-changes. To prevent practice effects, we randomize the order of items displayed to each participant. 

3 Analysis Setup 

Cohorts. Our study results can be analyzed across several cohorts, identified by three sender language groups (US White: US W, US Black: US B,Hindi speakers), two genders (Woman, Man), con-versation topic (Health, Everyday), source (Natural, Synthetic), and translation model. To formalize the relationships between these factors and their impact on usability, we describe them in a causal graph: the sender, starter’s source and topic, and transla-tion model all contribute to the translation quality, etc. 11 The graph is shown in Appendix Figure 5. 

> 11 We acknowledge the existence of other contingent factors—e.g., the age of participants, the recording device, background noise—which we do not control in this study.

41 2 3 4 5            

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Share  score
> Usability ( u)
> 65.9%
> 48.8%
> 43.2%
> US W
> US B
> Hindi (a) 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
> (W)
> Phi 4
> US B×(W)
> US W
> US B
> Health
> US W×(W)
> Tower+
> Voxtral
> -0.20
> 0.07
> 0.07
> 0.13
> 0.14
> 0.33
> 0.36
> 0.64
> 0.73 (b) US WUS BHindi
> 3.6
> 3.8
> 4.0
> 4.2
> 4.4
> 4.02 4.03
> 3.89
> 4.18
> 3.90
> 3.69
> Usability ( u)
> man
> woman (c)

Figure 2: ( a) Survival curves of usability scores by language group. Each curve shows the fraction of the group whose usability rating reaches or exceeds a given score on the x-axis. Annotations at u = 4 . (b) Fixed-effect estimates (95% CI) from a LMM predicting usability ( u) (§4.1). Filled circles p < 0.05 , diamonds 0.05 ≤ p < 0.1,hollow non-significant. Estimates annotated right of each interval. (c) Estimated marginal means ( ±95% CI) of usability by language group and gender, marginalized over topic and model. 

Quality Control on Recordings. Prompted speech collected through online platforms is prone to recording artifacts due to (device or environ-ment) noise, microphone activation delays, or un-familiarity with recording software that can cause the first milliseconds of an utterance to be clipped (Lee et al., 2025). We controlled for these issues with a semi-automatic procedure. We first tran-scribed all recordings with Whisper Large v3 and flagged entries meeting either of two conditions: the first or last three words (after normalization) do not match the prompt, or WER exceeds 0.6. One author then manually reviewed all flagged entries to eliminate false positives, and entries that failed verification were discarded. We excluded partici-pants with more than three faulty entries entirely. These checks led to the exclusion of two women and two men from US W, one woman and one man from US B plus two individual records from US B,and two women and three men from Hindi. The final corpus counts N = 1 ,738 observations across 

174 senders, 60 receivers, and 69 validators. 

Usability ( u). Prior literature establishes that trust and satisfaction can predict reliance (McGrath et al., 2025; Bhattacherjee, 2001), which led us to expect that senders would rate these three dimen-sions similarly within a given translation. To verify this, we run a standard factor analysis, confirming that more than 90% of the variance in the scores is explained by a single underlying factor (see Ap-pendix C.1). For practical purposes, we average the three scores at the instance level, creating a single compound usability score u based on the informed final judgments (§2.1), which we use as the target variable of interest in the study. We compare it to the baseline u in an upcoming analysis. 

Quality Metrics. When studying the correla-tion between translation quality and usability, we rely on the following set of automatic metrics, es-tablished and widely used in the NLP literature for their high agreement with human assessment of quality: COMET (Rei et al., 2020), COMET Kiwi Base and XL (Rei et al., 2022), XCOMET-XL (Guerreiro et al., 2024), and MetricX 24 XL (Juraska et al., 2024). We also include the judg-ments from 3 : Translation Score and QA Score, defined as the ratio of correct answers given in 2 .

4 Findings 

We begin by investigating our main interest: whether our participants have found the transla-tions usable (§4.1). Upon noting differences across groups, we analyze the effect of demographic fac-tors (§4.2) and translation quality (§4.3). Finally, we study how different “quality” signals relate to user-perceived usability (§4.4). 

4.1 Do lay users find ST outputs useful? Not fully , with most usability scores falling be-tween 3 and 4 in a 5-point Likert scale. Table 1 re-ports descriptive statistics across language groups, including the (final) usability u scores compared to the baseline scores. Figure 2a shows the u score distributions. US W score usability the highest in both the base-line ( ub = 4 .06 ) and final conditions ( u = 3 .87 )while Hindi the lowest ( 3.76 and 3.35 , respec-tively). When comparing baseline and final as-510 0 10 20             

> Phi 4
> US B×(W)
> US W×(W)
> Woman
> US B
> Health
> US W
> Tower+
> Voxtral
> -3.25
> -2.57
> -2.50
> 3.39
> 7.43
> 7.94
> 13.71
> 16.85
> 20.06 (a) US WUS BHindi
> 60
> 65
> 70
> 75
> 80
> 76.4
> 70.2
> 62.7
> 77.3
> 71.0
> 66.1
> Validator
> Translation
> Score
> man
> woman (b) DeSTA2 Phi 4 Voxtral Tower+
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Validator
> Translation
> Score
> Everyday
> Health
> 54.9
> 60.2
> 80.7
> 74.9
> 64.3
> 57.7
> 84.2 84.9 (c)

Figure 3: (a) Fixed-effect estimates (95% CI) from a linear mixed model predicting validator translation score. Reference: Hindi, Man, DeSTA2, Everyday, MED-MT. Filled circles p < 0.05 , diamonds 0.05 ≤ p < 0.1, hollow non-significant. (b) Model-adjusted marginal means ( ±95% CI) by language group and gender, marginalized over topic, model, and source. (c) Descriptive means ( ±95% CI) by translation model and conversation topic. 

sessments, all groups decrease their scores, and the distribution of their scores also increases in vari-ance. Therefore, the quality signals mitigate prior assumptions and increase the polarization of judg-ment. This result is expected, as this signal likely surfaces errors more evidently to them. However, such an effect varies across language groups. Hindi lower their scores ( −0.40 ) more than twice as much as US W do ( −0.19 ), an effect likely mediated by receiving poorer quality translations (discussed in §4.2). The two factors, hence, compound: US W

and Hindi start from uneven baselines, and this gap is exacerbated when becoming aware of ex-ternal quality signals. We do not record the same phenomenon between US W and US B.

4.2 How do demographics and contextual factors impact usability? Both contextual factors and demographics af-fect usability significantly. We fit a linear mixed regression model (LMM) to predict usability ( u)using the translation model, starter topic, source, and baseline u as fixed effects, and sender, val-idator, and receiver as random effects. Figure 2b shows some of the resulting coefficients (full de-tails in Appendix C.2). The largest variance is explained by the translation model, with Voxtral and Tower+ yielding the best scores ( p < 0.05 ; see per-model μ(u) in Appendix Figure 10). Scores on Health-related starters are significantly higher than Everyday (+ 0.33 , p < 0.05 ). Interestingly, the LMM discloses that language variant-based differences (Table 1) are not signif-icant. However, we observe a negative effect of Gender: Woman ( −0.2, p < 0.1) and a positive intersectional effect for the intersection of US W xWoman ( +0 .36 over the reference Hindi x Man, 

p < 0.05 ). As this finding suggests that within-language group differences might exist, we plot the marginal means estimated by the LMM in Fig-ure 2c. The figure offers one additional core in-sight: gaps in usability across groups are damp-ened by similar results on men; women, instead, scored translation unevenly. The biggest differ-ence is between US W and Hindi, where usability is 4.18 and 3.69 , respectively—a significant gap (p < 0.05 if computing pairwise differences, after Holm correction). Together, these findings suggest that a combination of factors—led by the choice of the translation model and the intersectional demo-graphic group—determines self-perceived usability. Moreover, these usability gaps across demographic groups raise a natural question: 

4.3 Are starters from certain senders systematically mistranslated? 

To address this question, we focus on the valida-tor’s SQM quality scores—one of the two human judgments of translation quality our study pro-vides (more in §4.4). We fit a new LMM to pre-dict it and inspect the model coefficients (see Fig-ure 3). Compared to Hindi, validators score US W

and US B higher by 13 .71 (p < 0.05 ) and 7.43 

(p < 0.1) points, respectively. Marginal means (Figure 3b) highlight these gaps better, where US W

men score 76 .4, against Hindi men’s 62 .7. Interest-ingly, within Hindi—the group with the worst qual-ity according to validators—women score higher 6Metric e elow emed ehigh                                      

> MetricX 24 2.35 1.35 0.74 1.03 XCOMET XL 1.94 1.13 0.79 0.82 COMET 2.85 1.27 *0.58 0.65 COMET Kiwi 2.43 1.37 *0.47 1.35 COMET Kiwi XL 2.69 1.44 0.77 1.33 Translation Score 2.11 0.69 0.55 0.32 QA Score 2.94 1.61 2.64 3.06
> Table 2: Quality metrics effect on usability ( u). From a LMM ( ecolumn) and from OLS models fitted within low, medium, and high translation score tertiles. An effect of kmeans that moving from the worst- to the best-observed quality on that metric is associated with ak-point shift in usability (1–5 scale), holding other covariates constant. All metrics rescaled to [0 ,1] . All effects but (*) are significant ( p < 0.01 ).

than men, despite later expressing lower usability scores (Figure 2c). Moreover, Figure 3c reports the means by model and topic. As expected, transla-tion quality also varies significantly by translation model, with Voxtral and Tower+ leading the board and Health receiving higher scores overall. Yet validator SQM scores are just one lens, and an expensive one. The question is whether cheaper, automated signals tell the same story. 

4.4 Do translation quality signals predict usability? Partially, and QA is superior to coarse-grained overall judgments . We compute simple Spear-man rank correlation against u and note a variable degree across metrics (see Appendix Figure 11). Among automatic metrics, XCOMET XL is the highest ( ρ = 0 .49 ), and COMET is the lowest (ρ = 0 .42 ), whereas Human judgments have rea-sonably higher correlation. However, QA Score has ρ = 0 .63 , which is interestingly higher than translation Score ( ρ = 0 .56 ). To further investigate these differences, we con-duct two more measurements. (1) We fit one LMM per metric using the same fixed- and random-effects setup as in §4.1 adding the metric to co-variates, and storing the resulting coefficient—this number measures the metric’s effect on usability. (2) We split the records following the Translation Score’s tertiles, identifying three quality regimes; for each, we fit one Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression on u (more robust than LMM for setups with fewer data points), again rotating the metrics and recording the coefficient. These numbers tell us how closely each metric tracks usability at vary-ing quality. Table 2 reports these coefficients. We find that automatic metric effects decline as qual-ity increases. Translation Score shows a similar trend, whereas QA confirms the stronger effect, outscoring all metrics across all regimes. This find-ing suggests that fine-grained content-based evalua-tion tracks usability more consistently than a single overall quality score at varying quality levels. 

5 Discussion 

Our results call for renewed interest in human-centered evaluation of ST. We demonstrate that user-perceived usability and coarse-grained transla-tion quality are related but distinct constructs—and that this distinction matters. This is where O U- 

> VIA

adds value: by situating evaluation in a real communicative exchange, it surfaces nuances that aggregate quality scores obscure—from which sys-tems and demographic groups benefit, to where standard metrics fail as deployment signals. 

The choice of ST is consequential, and newer is not always better. For realistic use cases, di-rect ST is not always the right solution: both Phi 4 and DeSTA2, despite being recently released, lag behind a simpler cascade pipeline that combines a smaller foundation speech recognition model (Whisper v3) with a larger, highly specialized trans-lation model (Tower+) (see Figure 3c for details). This finding underscores that “new” does not guar-antee “usable,” and that practitioners should evalu-ate systems on ecologically valid tasks rather than standard benchmarks alone. 

Demographic gaps persist and have real stakes. 

We find significant usability gaps along both lan-guage variety and gender. This finding aligns with prior work documenting inequitable ST perfor-mance on standard benchmarks (Fucci et al., 2025), but our results extend this concern to systems in ac-tual deployment scenarios. As shown in Figure 2a, more than 66% of US W speakers find the system usable ( u ≥ 4), compared to only 49% for US B

speakers and 43% for Hindi speakers. These are not abstract disparities: because our usability mea-sure explicitly captures willingness to rely on the translation in real-world situations, what is at stake is whether a speaker will use ST technology for consequential communication, depending on the variety of English they speak. 

QA-based evaluation tracks usability better than standard quality metrics. Translation qual-71 2 3 4 5      

> 0.75
> 0.80
> 0.85
> 0.90
> 0.95
> 1.00
> Mean QA Score
> 0.870
> 0.909
> 0.954
> 12345
> 0.78
> 0.80
> 0.82
> 0.84
> Mean COMET
> 0.812
> 0.823
> 0.830 Figure 4: Mean QA Score and COMET ( ±95% CI)
> among records whose usability meets or exceeds each threshold value on the x-axis. Error bars are 95% confi-dence intervals. Annotations at thresholds 3, 4, and 5.

ity predicts usability, but not all quality signals are equally informative. Standard quality estima-tion metrics rank highly on leaderboards for over-all quality prediction (Kocmi et al., 2025), yet in communicative settings, they explain only a frac-tion of variation in user-perceived usability. QA score, which measures whether key information, such as named entities and quantities, is translated correctly, is a substantially better predictor. Cru-cially, it is also more robust: in the high-quality regime, differences in standard automatic metrics poorly distinguish between translations that users find more or less usable, whereas differences in QA score do. Figure 2 illustrates this contrast directly. 

Toward usability-grounded deployment thresh-olds. Translation quality metrics are not designed to capture usability, so their limited predictive power is unsurprising. They also remain opaque: providing a generic overall score with mostly com-parative power—model X outperforms model Y— but offering little sense of whether, and how effec-tively, a translation serves a user’s communicative needs (Savoldi et al., 2025). Yet usability human assessment is not scalable. We thus leverage our study to anchor existing metrics to a concrete us-ability threshold. In Figure 4, we map QA Score— a potentially automatable evaluation signal—and COMET—the metric with the highest impact on usability (Table 2)—onto the usability scores they correspond to. At u = 4, a reasonable threshold for a translation a lay user would satisfactorily rely on in practice, a QA Score of ∼0.91 and a COMET score of ∼0.82 can serve as practical de-ployment benchmarks. Notably, unlike COMET, QA score remains more meaningful beyond this point, thus adding further evidence in favor of its discriminative power. When human judgments are unavailable, these thresholds can offer a principled, usability-grounded basis for system selection and deployment decisions. 

6 Related Work 

Our work sits at the intersection of user-centered approaches to machine translation (MT) (Carpuat et al., 2025) and demographic disparities in speech technologies (Gaido et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022; Harris et al., 2024). For MT, prior work has ex-plored user needs in realistic settings across medi-cal and migration domains (Mehandru et al., 2023; Valdez and Guerberof-Arenas, 2025). Xiao et al. (2025) shows that users overly trust MT outputs with mistranslations, and Ki et al. (2025b) focuses on quality feedback that helps users calibrate MT reliance in communication settings. Savoldi et al. (2024) further demonstrates that automatic met-rics fail to capture the real-world human and eco-nomic costs of gender bias in MT. Calls for ground-ing evaluation in user needs and societal relevance are growing (Liebling et al., 2022; Savoldi et al., 2025; Ungless et al., 2025), yet remain largely un-addressed in ST—the emerging frontier for human-to-human mediated communication. Our work is the first to bring these concerns together under that modality, revealing the limits of ST for communica-tion, across accents, as well as showing the limits of coarse-grained assessments for real-world usability. Our findings point toward QA-based assessment (Ki et al., 2025a; Fernandes et al., 2025)—which targets accurate transmission of key information rather than closeness to a human reference—as a stronger proxy for the real-world usability that lay users need in situated, communicative scenarios. 

7 Conclusion 

We have introduced Ouvia, a new evaluation frame-work to study the user-perceived usability of sev-eral state-of-the-art ST systems. We described how we designed a multi-phase user study that under-pins our research questions, collecting N = 1 , 738 

judgments from 174 speakers across diverse de-mographic groups. Our results show that current systems serve real-world users only to a limited extent, that usability gaps persist across speaker demographics, and that QA-based evaluation is a substantially stronger predictor of usability than standard automatic metrics. Together, these find-ings reinforce the need for human-centered, situ-ated evaluation of ST—one that goes beyond holis-tic quality scores and attends to who the technology serves, in what context, and to what end. 8Limitations 

Language pair. Reliable assessments require siz-able data samples and participant pools, which we prioritize during budget allocation. For this reason, we limit our study to one language pair (English - European Portuguese), while including speakers across genders and language variants motivated by realistic usage scenarios of immigrants in Portugal. We remain cautious about generalizing our findings to language pairs that are underserved by current speech technologies, where usability gaps may be more pronounced. 

Scripted and clean speech. Our conversation starters are grammatically fluent, and senders are instructed to read them aloud without fillers, rep-etitions, or disfluencies. While this allows us to control for content quality, it departs from natural-istic spoken communication, where such features could affect downstream translation. Similarly, we ask senders to record in noise-free environments, resulting in clean, read speech that differs from the acoustic conditions typical of real-world use—such as background noise. Thus, these conditions likely favor current speech translation systems, meaning our usability estimates may be optimistic relative to deployment scenarios. While—to the best of our knowledge—our study is the first to approximate a realistic communication setting for evaluating speech technologies, future work should examine usability in more spontaneous settings. 

Crowdworkers. Our validators are bilingual crowdworkers rather than professional translators. Still, non-expert can provide reliable assessment using standardized scales (Kocmi et al., 2022). Fur-thermore, our binary QA validation task requires comprehension rather than translation expertise. 

Usability and QA. QA-based evaluation is a strong predictor of usability in our data, particu-larly in high-quality regimes, pointing to its poten-tial as a future evaluation proxy. Still, further work is needed to understand this relationship across other communicative settings and with fully au-tomated pipelines. Notably, our QA assessment is manual and disclosed to the sender—yet so is the validator’s holistic quality score, which corre-lates substantially less with usability. This sug-gests it is the fine-grained, information-targeted nature of QA that drives its predictive power, not the human involvement or disclosure alone. More-over, QA-based evaluation in O UVIA is simpli-fied by ( i) the existence of ground truth conver-sation starters, which we use to extract the ques-tions, but that might not be generally available, and (ii ) the starters’ content itself, which is, by design, information-rich in our study. 

Ethical Considerations 

Intended Use and Participation. OUVIA is de-signed for evaluating the usability of ST systems across diverse demographic groups. All partici-pants were recruited through Prolific and finan-cially compensated according to the platform’s standards. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Instituto Superior Técnico. All par-ticipants provided informed consent prior to partic-ipation. 

Voice Privacy. Voice data carries inherent re-identification risks: a speaker may be recognized even absent explicit metadata, and recordings can in principle be used for voice cloning. Our study design minimizes these risks by collecting only few segments for each participant (10), with short recordings (30s or less), which hinder faithful voice cloning. The released dataset will require users to explicitly agree not to use it for voice cloning or individual identification purposes. 

Gender. Gender is among the most salient per-ceptual traits of one’s identity (Fuchs and Toda, 2010; Zimman, 2021), and gendered differences represent a central concern in sociophonetic re-search (Zimman, 2020) and speech technologies (Attanasio et al., 2024; Sanchez et al., 2024). Fol-lowing Prolific’s screening filters, we operational-ize gender as a self-declared attribute using Man 

and Woman as categories, each subsuming both cisgender and transgender speakers. We initially included a Non-Binary option (as available in Pro-lific) for our two largest cohorts (US White and US Black). However, we ultimately excluded it: the category is an overly broad umbrella term that conflates distinct gender identities, making group-level comparisons theoretically unsound. This was further reflected in low uptake (four participants). Recruiting through queer and allied communities to improve participation and gender diversity be-yond the binary remains an important direction for future work. 9References 

Abdelrahman Abouelenin, Atabak Ashfaq, Adam Atkin-son, Hany Awadalla, Nguyen Bach, Jianmin Bao, Alon Benhaim, Martin Cai, Vishrav Chaudhary, Con-gcong Chen, and 1 others. 2025. Phi-4-mini tech-nical report: Compact yet powerful multimodal lan-guage models via mixture-of-loras. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01743 .AIMA. 2025. Relatório de migrações e asilo 2024. Technical report, Agência para a Integração, Mi-grações e Asilo (AIMA I.P.), Lisboa. Edição Digital. Coordenação: Sílvia Lopes. Giuseppe Attanasio, Beatrice Savoldi, Dennis Fucci, and Dirk Hovy. 2024. Twists, humps, and peb-bles: Multilingual speech recognition models exhibit gender performance gaps. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 21318–21340, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Jeffrey Basoah, Daniel Chechelnitsky, Tao Long, Katha-rina Reinecke, Chrysoula Zerva, Kaitlyn Zhou, Mark Díaz, and Maarten Sap. 2025. Not like us, hunty: Measuring perceptions and behavioral effects of mi-noritized anthropomorphic cues in llms. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 ACM Conference on Fairness, Ac-countability, and Transparency , pages 710–745. Anol Bhattacherjee. 2001. Understanding information systems continuance: An expectation-confirmation model1. MIS quarterly , 25(3):351–370. Marc Brysbaert. 2019. How many participants do we have to include in properly powered experiments? a tutorial of power analysis with reference tables. 

Journal of cognition , 2(1):16. Marine Carpuat, Omri Asscher, Kalika Bali, Luisa Bentivogli, Frédéric Blain, Lynne Bowker, Mono-jit Choudhury, Hal Daumé III, Kevin Duh, Ge Gao, Alvin Grissom II, Marzena Karpinska, Elaine C. Khoong, William D. Lewis, André F. T. Martins, Mary Nurminen, Douglas W. Oard, Maja Popovic, Michel Simard, and François Yvon. 2025. An in-terdisciplinary approach to human-centered machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pages 22859–22879, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Gary Charness, Uri Gneezy, and Michael A Kuhn. 2012. Experimental methods: Between-subject and within-subject design. Journal of economic behavior & organization , 81(1):1–8. Sonia Colina. 2009. Further evidence for a functionalist approach to translation quality evaluation. Target. In-ternational Journal of Translation Studies , 21(2):235– 264. M. Amin Farajian, António V. Lopes, André F. T. Mar-tins, Sameen Maruf, and Gholamreza Haffari. 2020. Findings of the WMT 2020 shared task on chat trans-lation. In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Machine Translation , pages 65–75, Online. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Faiha Fareez, Tishya Parikh, Christopher Wavell, Saba Shahab, Meghan Chevalier, Scott Good, Isabella De Blasi, Rafik Rhouma, Christopher McMahon, Jean-Paul Lam, and 1 others. 2022. A dataset of sim-ulated patient-physician medical interviews with a focus on respiratory cases. Scientific Data , 9(1):313. Patrick Fernandes, Sweta Agrawal, Emmanouil Zara-nis, André FT Martins, and Graham Neubig. 2025. Do llms understand your translations? evaluating paragraph-level mt with question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07583 .Dennis Fucci, Marco Gaido, Matteo Negri, Luisa Ben-tivogli, Andre Martins, and Giuseppe Attanasio. 2025. Different speech translation models encode and translate speaker gender differently. In Proceed-ings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Pa-pers) , pages 1005–1019, Vienna, Austria. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Susanne Fuchs and Martine Toda. 2010. Do differences in male versus female/s/reflect biological or sociopho-netic factors. Turbulent sounds: An interdisciplinary guide , 21:281–302. Marco Gaido, Beatrice Savoldi, Luisa Bentivogli, Mat-teo Negri, and Marco Turchi. 2020. Breeding gender-aware direct speech translation systems. In Proceed-ings of the 28th International Conference on Com-putational Linguistics , pages 3951–3964, Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Committee on Compu-tational Linguistics. Ariana Genovese, Sahar Borna, Cesar A Gomez-Cabello, Syed Ali Haider, Srinivasagam Prabha, An-tonio J Forte, and Benjamin R Veenstra. 2024. Ar-tificial intelligence in clinical settings: a systematic review of its role in language translation and interpre-tation. Annals of Translational Medicine , 12(6):117. Yvette Graham, Timothy Baldwin, Alistair Moffat, and Justin Zobel. 2013. Continuous measurement scales in human evaluation of machine translation. In Pro-ceedings of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop and Interoperability with Discourse , pages 33–41, Sofia, Bulgaria. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Nuno M. Guerreiro, Ricardo Rei, Daan van Stigt, Luisa Coheur, Pierre Colombo, and André F. T. Mar-tins. 2024. xCOMET: Transparent machine trans-lation evaluation through fine-grained error detection. 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:979–995. HyoJung Han, Kevin Duh, and Marine Carpuat. 2024. SpeechQE: Estimating the quality of direct speech translation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference 

10 on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pages 21852–21867, Miami, Florida, USA. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Camille Harris, Chijioke Mgbahurike, Neha Kumar, and Diyi Yang. 2024. Modeling gender and dialect bias in automatic speech recognition. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 15166–15184, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Robert R. Hoffman, Shane T. Mueller, Gary Klein, and Jordan Litman. 2023. Measures for explainable ai: Explanation goodness, user satisfaction, mental mod-els, curiosity, trust, and human-ai performance. Fron-tiers in Computer Science , Volume 5 - 2023. Eduard Hovy, Margaret King, and Andrei Popescu-Belis. 2002. Principles of context-based ma-chine translation evaluation. Machine Translation ,17(1):43–75. John Hutchins. 2005. Current commercial machine translation systems and computer-based translation tools: system types and their uses. International journal of translation , 17(1-2):5–38. ISO. 2018. ISO 9241-11:2018 — ergonomics of human-system interaction—part 11: Usability: Definitions and concepts. Standard, International Organization for Standardization. Eshin Jolly. 2018. Pymer4: Connecting r and python for linear mixed modeling. Journal of Open Source Software , 3(31):862. Juraj Juraska, Daniel Deutsch, Mara Finkelstein, and Markus Freitag. 2024. MetricX-24: The Google submission to the WMT 2024 metrics shared task. In Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Machine Translation , pages 492–504, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Juraj Juraska, Tobias Domhan, Mara Finkelstein, Tetsuji Nakagawa, Geza Kovacs, Daniel Deutsch, Pidong Wang, and Markus Freitag. 2025. MetricX-25 and GemSpanEval: Google Translate submissions to the WMT25 evaluation shared task. In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on Machine Translation , pages 957–968, Suzhou, China. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Elaine C Khoong, Eric Steinbrook, Cortlyn Brown, and Alicia Fernandez. 2019. Assessing the use of google translate for spanish and chinese translations of emer-gency department discharge instructions. JAMA in-ternal medicine , 179(4):580–582. Dayeon Ki, Kevin Duh, and Marine Carpuat. 2025a. AskQE: Question answering as automatic evaluation for machine translation. In Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 ,pages 17478–17515, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Dayeon Ki, Kevin Duh, and Marine Carpuat. 2025b. Should I share this translation? evaluating quality feedback for user reliance on machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 12069–12092, Suzhou, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Tom Kocmi, Ekaterina Artemova, Eleftherios Avramidis, Rachel Bawden, Ondˇ rej Bojar, Kon-stantin Dranch, Anton Dvorkovich, Sergey Dukanov, Mark Fishel, Markus Freitag, Thamme Gowda, Roman Grundkiewicz, Barry Haddow, Marzena Karpinska, Philipp Koehn, Howard Lakougna, Jessica Lundin, Christof Monz, Kenton Murray, and 10 others. 2025. Findings of the WMT25 general machine translation shared task: Time to stop evaluating on easy test sets. In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on Machine Translation ,pages 355–413, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tom Kocmi, Rachel Bawden, Ondˇ rej Bojar, Anton Dvorkovich, Christian Federmann, Mark Fishel, Thamme Gowda, Yvette Graham, Roman Grund-kiewicz, Barry Haddow, Rebecca Knowles, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz, Makoto Morishita, Masaaki Nagata, Toshiaki Nakazawa, Michal Novák, Martin Popel, and Maja Popovi´ c. 2022. Findings of the 2022 conference on machine translation (WMT22). In 

Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Machine Translation (WMT) , pages 1–45, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (Hybrid). Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Allison Koenecke, Andrew Nam, Emily Lake, Joe Nudell, Minnie Quartey, Zion Mengesha, Connor Toups, John R. Rickford, Dan Jurafsky, and Sharad Goel. 2020. Racial disparities in automated speech recognition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117(14):7684–7689. Beomseok Lee, Marco Gaido, Ioan Calapodescu, Lau-rent Besacier, and Matteo Negri. 2025. Speech foun-dation models and crowdsourcing for efficient, high-quality data collection. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguis-tics , pages 6816–6826, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Daniel Liebling, Katherine Heller, Samantha Robertson, and Wesley Deng. 2022. Opportunities for human-centered evaluation of machine translation systems. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2022 , pages 229–240, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Alexander H Liu, Andy Ehrenberg, Andy Lo, Clé-ment Denoix, Corentin Barreau, Guillaume Lam-ple, Jean-Malo Delignon, Khyathi Raghavi Chandu, Patrick von Platen, Pavankumar Reddy Muddireddy, and 1 others. 2025. Voxtral. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.13264 .

11 Ting Liu, Chi-kiu Lo, Elizabeth Marshman, and Re-becca Knowles. 2024. Evaluation briefs: Drawing on translation studies for human evaluation of MT. In 

Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the Associa-tion for Machine Translation in the Americas (Volume 1: Research Track) , pages 190–208, Chicago, USA. Association for Machine Translation in the Americas. Ke-Han Lu, Zhehuai Chen, Szu-Wei Fu, Chao-Han Huck Yang, Jagadeesh Balam, Boris Gins-burg, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, and Hung-yi Lee. 2025. Developing instruction-following speech lan-guage model without speech instruction-tuning data. In ICASSP 2025-2025 IEEE International Confer-ence on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 1–5. IEEE. Melanie J. McGrath, Oliver Lack, James Tisch, and Andreas Duenser. 2025. Measuring trust in artificial intelligence: validation of an established scale and its short form. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence ,Volume 8 - 2025. Nikita Mehandru, Sweta Agrawal, Yimin Xiao, Ge Gao, Elaine Khoong, Marine Carpuat, and Niloufar Salehi. 2023. Physician detection of clinical harm in ma-chine translation: Quality estimation aids in reliance and backtranslation identifies critical errors. In Pro-ceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 11633– 11647, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Mary Nurminen. 2021. Investigating the influence of context in the use and reception of raw machine trans-lation. Sara Papi, Javier Garcia Gilabert, Zachary Hopton, Vilém Zouhar, Carlos Escolano, Gerard I Gál-lego, Jorge Iranzo-Sánchez, Ahrii Kim, Dominik Macháˇ cek, Patricia Schmidtova, and 1 others. 2025. Hearing to translate: The effectiveness of speech modality integration into llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16378 .Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brock-man, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. 2023. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak su-pervision. In International conference on machine learning , pages 28492–28518. PMLR. Ricardo Rei, José G. C. de Souza, Duarte Alves, Chrysoula Zerva, Ana C Farinha, Taisiya Glushkova, Alon Lavie, Luisa Coheur, and André F. T. Martins. 2022. COMET-22: Unbabel-IST 2022 submission for the metrics shared task. In Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Machine Translation (WMT) ,pages 578–585, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (Hybrid). Association for Computational Linguistics. Ricardo Rei, Nuno M Guerreiro, José Pombal, João Alves, Pedro Teixeirinha, Amin Farajian, and An-dré FT Martins. 2025. Tower+: Bridging generality and translation specialization in multilingual llms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.17080 .Ricardo Rei, Craig Stewart, Ana C Farinha, and Alon Lavie. 2020. COMET: A neural framework for MT evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing (EMNLP) , pages 2685–2702, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Elizabeth Salesky, Marcello Federico, and Antonis Anastasopoulos, editors. 2025. Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT 2025) . Association for Compu-tational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria (in-person and online). Ariadna Sanchez, Alice Ross, and Nina Markl. 2024. Beyond the binary: Limitations and possibilities of gender-related speech technology research. In 2024 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT) ,pages 526–532. IEEE. Beatrice Savoldi, Sara Papi, Matteo Negri, Ana Guerberof-Arenas, and Luisa Bentivogli. 2024. What the harm? quantifying the tangible impact of gender bias in machine translation with a human-centered study. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 18048–18076, Miami, Florida, USA. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Beatrice Savoldi, Alan Ramponi, Matteo Negri, and Luisa Bentivogli. 2025. Translation in the hands of many: Centering lay users in machine translation in-teractions. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 13876–13889, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Breena R Taira, Vanessa Kreger, Aristides Orue, and Lisa C Diamond. 2021. A pragmatic assessment of google translate for emergency department in-structions. Journal of General Internal Medicine ,36(11):3361–3365. Eddie L. Ungless, Sunipa Dev, Cynthia L. Bennett, Re-becca Gulotta, Jasmijn Bastings, and Remi Denton. 2025. Amplifying trans and nonbinary voices: A community-centred harm taxonomy for LLMs. In 

Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 20503–20535, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Susana Valdez and Ana Guerberof-Arenas. 2025. “google translate is our best friend here” a vignette-based interview study on machine translation use for health communication. Translation Spaces ,14(2):253–276. Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, and 3 others. 2020. Trans-formers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. 

12 In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 38–45, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yimin Xiao, Yongle Zhang, Dayeon Ki, Calvin Bao, Marianna J. Martindale, Charlotte Vaughn, Ge Gao, and Marine Carpuat. 2025. Toward machine transla-tion literacy: How lay users perceive and rely on im-perfect translations. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 33997–34014, Suzhou, China. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Emmanouil Zaranis, Giuseppe Attanasio, Sweta Agrawal, and Andre Martins. 2025. Watching the watchers: Exposing gender disparities in machine translation quality estimation. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 25261–25284, Vienna, Austria. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Yuanyuan Zhang, Yixuan Zhang, Bence Mark Halpern, Tanvina Patel, and Odette Scharenborg. 2022. Mit-igating bias against non-native accents. In Inter-speech , pages 3168–3172. Lal Zimman. 2020. Sociophonetics. The International Encyclopedia of Linguistic Anthropology , pages 1–5. Lal Zimman. 2021. Gender diversity and the voice. In 

> The Routledge handbook of language, gender, and sexuality , pages 69–90. Routledge.

A Participant Recruitment 

We recruited all participants through https://www. prolific.com/ , an established platform to recruit crowdworkers. To join the study, each participant had to read and accept the Terms and Conditions, which had been approved in advance by an Ethics Committee. Participants could join the study only once and in a single role. All participants were paid 9 GBP/h. All participants were allowed to join the study using a smartphone, tablet, or notebook. The following is a list of criteria to join the study: • US W Sender : Nationality: USA, First Lan-guage: English, Gender: Man/Woman (includ-ing transgender), Broad Ethnic Group: White, Approval Rate: 75 –100 .• US B Sender : Nationality: USA, First Lan-guage: English, Gender: Man/Woman (in-cluding transgender), Broad Ethnic Group: Black/Afroamerican, Approval Rate: 75 –100 .• Hindi Sender : First Language: Hindi, Fluent Language: English, Gender: Man/Woman (in-cluding transgender), Approval Rate: 75 –100 .• Receiver : First Language: Portuguese, Gen-der: Man/Woman (including transgender), Approval Rate: 75 –100 .• Validator : First Language: Portuguese, Flu-ent Language: English, Gender: Man/Woman (including transgender), Approval Rate: 75 –

100 .

A.1 First- vs. Third-Perspective Assessments 

To validate the use of replacement participants in cases where original senders dropped out of the lon-gitudinal study, we examined whether subjective usability scores differed depending on whether the assessment was given from a first-person perspec-tive (senders evaluating their own recorded inter-actions, N = 1 ,358 ) or a third-person perspective (replacement participants evaluating interactions they had not produced, N = 380 ). We fitted a linear mixed-effects model (REML) predicting the average survey score from perspective alongside translation quality, comprehension rate, translation model, gender, and language group as fixed effects, with random intercepts for participant and conver-sation starter. The perspective coefficient was neg-ligible and non-significant ( β = 0 .009 , p = .873 ), indicating no meaningful difference in subjective ratings between the two perspectives. These results justify the replacement strategy: crowdworkers as-sessing conversations they did not themselves pro-duce provided ratings statistically indistinguishable from those of the original senders. 

B Experimental Details 

B.1 Starters Preparation 

Our starters sourced from existing sources required some rephrasing to be transformed into a plausible conversation started. In practice, we used Gemini 2.5 Pro to conduct the rephrasing. In all cases, we sampled with temperature of 0.9, top_p of 0.95, and top_k of 20, and used the following system prompt: “You are a language model specialized in generating high-quality synthetic data.”. Figure 9 reports the prompts used for both datasets. 

B.2 Validation of Conversation Starters and Questions 

To assess the quality of our starters and associated questions, we conducted a manual validation on a sample of 20 starters associated with 10 sets of unique English questions (i.e. 7% of the dataset, 20 13 Translation Model 

> Sender
> Conversation
> Starter Topic
> Conversation
> Starter Source
> Translation /
> Translation Quality
> Validator
> Translation Score
> QA-based
> Evaluation
> Baseline
> Usability Score
> Usability Score
> Sender Receiver
> Validator

Figure 5: Causal Graph. The links establish how different factors interact in the study. Boxes describe contextual (yellow shading) and latent (gray) factors that shape the result variables (white), alongside the study participants. 

Help me generate a dataset of conversation starters. Each conversation takes place within a specific context, and the person is seeking a particular piece of information. The generated starters will be read aloud by human actors to simulate a real-life interaction. Follow these rules for the generation: 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

- Use a natural tone. We are emulating real-life mundane scenarios. - Assume the two people do not know each other. - Make the starter 's information dense. We aim to include named entities, numerical quantities, context-specific technical terms, and other relevant information. ,→

- The conversation starter MUST be 50-60 words long. - Do not generate anything else beside the conversation starter. Generate one conversation starter in English for this scenario following the scenario-specific instructions provided. ,→

Scenario: One person enters a pharmacy and asks the counter staff for advice and medication. Instructions: The person has to greet the pharmacist, explain their symptoms and recent medication history, and ask for advice and a new prescription. ,→

You can imagine the person can suffering from one of these generic illnesses: cold and flu symptoms, headaches and migraines, digestive issues, allergies, skin conditions, muscle and join pain, minor infections, sleep problems, eye and ear issues, menstrual and reproductive health. 

> ,→
> ,→

Be sure to provide detailed descriptions of the symptoms, as well as the exact names and quantities of the medication. ,→

Figure 6: Example prompt for synthetic data generation. Over-the-counter pharmacy scenario. 

You are a professional English to Portuguese translator, tasked with providing translations suitable for use in Portugal. Your goal is to accurately convey the meaning and nuances of the original English text while adhering to Portuguese grammar, vocabulary, and cultural sensitivities. 

> ,→
> ,→

Please translate the following English text into Portuguese, preserving the original formatting (e.g. double newlines, indentation). Produce only the Portuguese translation, without any additional explanations or commentary. 

> ,→
> ,→

Figure 7: Prompt for Question Translation. We use it to prepare Portuguese questions in 2 .

starters and 200 questions). The analysis was con-ducted by one author with a background in trans-lation studies. We verified the starter content and the grounding of such questions in the starter con-tent. No issues were found with the starters. Out of 200 questions, only one raised an ambiguity, making it arguably unanswerable. Such issues are thus rare and do not undermine the overall quality of the dataset. Moreover, they are accounted for in the validation process: receivers can explicitly flag a question as unanswerable, and validators can accept this response as correct. 14 You are an expert in quality assurance for speech translation, specializing in English-to-Portuguese for healthcare and everyday conversational scenarios. Your task is to generate question-answer pairs *in English* based on an original English passage. These QA pairs are designed to help a human evaluator quickly assess the accuracy of a Portuguese translation derived from the English audio/text. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

The **Answers** to your questions should isolate **critical pieces of information** from the original passage. These are elements where a mistranslation into Portuguese would likely lead to significant misunderstanding, incorrect actions, or potential harm, especially in a healthcare context. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

**Focus on extracting:** 1. **Key Entities:** * **Healthcare:** Specific symptoms (e.g., "sharp pain," "dizziness"), body parts, medications (names, dosages like "500 milligrams"), allergies, medical conditions, procedures. ,→

* **Everyday:** Names of people/places, specific times, dates, quantities, objects. 2. **Crucial Quantifiers and Qualifiers:** Numbers, amounts, frequencies (e.g., "twice a day," "three weeks"), severity levels (e.g., "mild," "severe"), durations. ,→

3. **Negations and Affirmations:** Clear "yes/no" type information, presence or absence of symptoms/conditions (e.g., "no fever," "is allergic"). ,→

4. **Core Instructions/Actions:** Essential verbs and objects related to what someone needs to do (e.g., "take with food," "call the doctor," "meet at the corner"). ,→

5. **Conditional Information:** Key details under specific circumstances (e.g., "if the pain worsens"). ,→

**The Questions should directly probe for these critical pieces of information.** The questions must be answerable *solely* from the provided English passage. ,→

**Constraints:** * Both Questions and Answers MUST be in English. * Answers should be concise and represent the exact critical information. * Questions should be clear and unambiguous. * Generate a diverse set of questions covering different types of critical information present in the passage. ,→

* The goal is to create checks that quickly reveal if the core, essential information has been preserved in the Portuguese translation. ,→

**Format:** Q: <question1> A: <answer1> Q: <question2> A: <answer2> ... **Original Passage:** passage **Question-Answer Pairs:** 

Figure 8: Prompt for Question Generation. We use the generated questions in 2 .

B.3 Scalar Quality Metric 

For the quality assessment, we use the SQM scale that features seven labeled tick marks indicating different quality labels combining accuracy and 

grammatical correctness described as follows: • 6: Perfect Meaning and Grammar: The mean-ing of the translation is completely consistent with the source and the surrounding context (if applicable). The grammar is also correct. • 4: Most Meaning Preserved and Few Gram-mar Mistakes: The translation retains most of the meaning of the source. It may have some grammar mistakes or minor contextual inconsistencies. • 2: Some Meaning Preserved: The translation preserves some of the meaning of the source 15 Please convert this transcribed text into a fluent text. Preserve as much medical information as possible. The resulting text should contain at least 50-60 words. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> {seed} Please convert this dialogue into a single turn request by the customer using all the details provided. The resulting text should be fluent text with at least 50-60 words.
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> {seed}

Figure 9: Paraphrasing Prompts. Used to prepare the conversation starters from MT-MED (top) and BCon-TrasT (bottom). “ seed ” is the original data point from the respective dataset. 

but misses significant parts. The narrative is hard to follow due to fundamental errors. Grammar may be poor. • 0: Nonsense/No meaning preserved: Nearly all information is lost between the translation and source. Grammar is irrelevant. 

B.4 Translation Details 

We use Hugging Face’s transformers classes and models to run all automatic translations (Wolf et al., 2020). For Phi 4 (HF ID: microsoft/Phi-4-multimodal-instruct) and Voxtral Small (HF ID: mistralai/Voxtral-Small-24B-2507), we use the prompt “Translate the audio to Portuguese.”, whereas for DeSTA2 we use the slightly more com-plex “Translate this audio to Portuguese. Produce only the Portuguese translation, without any addi-tional explanations or commentary.” as the model showed the tendency to generate additional content besides the translation. We load Whisper v3 and Voxtral in bfloat16. In all runs, we used a batch size of 1 and standard decoding parameters as im-plemented in transformers . To translate the tran-script with Tower+, we use the following prompt: “Translate the following English source text to Por-tuguese (Portugal):\nEnglish: {text}\nPortuguese (Portugal): ” and greedy decoding. 

C Additional Results 

C.1 Factor Analysis on Survey Scores 

Since each sender reports three scores— satisfaction, trust, and reliance—we conduct a factor analysis to verify whether they represent distinct constructs or can be treated as a single DeSTA2 Phi 4 Voxtral Tower+        

> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Usability ( u)
> 2.76
> 3.24
> 3.90 3.63
> 3.33 3.33
> 4.01 4.12
> Everyday Health
> 0.0 0.5 1.0
> u(Health - Everyday)
> DeSTA2
> Phi 4
> Voxtral
> Tower+
> 0.57
> 0.10
> 0.11
> 0.50

Figure 10: Mean usability scores by translation model and conversation topic. Left: estimated means 

±95% CI for Everyday and Health conversations. Right: per-model difference ∆u = uHealth − uEveryday with 95% CI; positive values indicate higher usability for health-related conversations. 

composite measure. Given the nested structure of the data—10 interaction-level observations per participant—we decompose variance into a within-user component (person-mean-centered scores, n = 1 ,200 ) and a between-user component (per-user means, n = 120 ), and run exploratory factor analysis (EFA) independently on each. Prior to fitting, Bartlett’s test of sphericity confirmed that the correlation matrices were significantly different from identity at both levels (within: χ2 = 5927 .9, p < .0001 ; between: 

χ2(3) = 733 .6, p < . 001 ), and Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) values indicated adequate sampling adequacy (within: KMO = 0.781 ; between: KMO = 0 .774 ). Parallel analysis (500 iterations, 95th percentile threshold) retained a single factor at both levels. The one-factor solution explained 

89 .1% of within-user variance and 92 .7% of between-user variance. These results indicate that satisfaction, trust, and reliance do not function as empirically distinct constructs in our data: participants rated them nearly interchangeably across interactions and across individuals. We therefore average the three scores into a single composite measure, which serves as the dependent variable in all subsequent analyses. 

C.2 Linear Mixed Effects Model 

We use pymer4 (Jolly, 2018) to fit Linear Mixed Ef-fects Models in our analysis, using REML. Table 4 reports the coefficients, confidence intervals, and significance level ( p) of the model used to predict the usability variable u.

D AI Use Statement 

We used AI coding tools to streamline the gener-ation of visual artifacts of the paper, and writing 16 Source Topic Example Count 

MED-MT Patient-Physician Hello, I came in today because I have been feeling unwell for about a week now. My primary symptom is a very persistent and sore throat that hasn’t improved. In addition to that, I have also started experiencing chills over the last few nights, so I thought it would be best to get it checked out professionally. 50 Synthetic Over-the-counter Pharmacy Hi there, I’m hoping you can help. For the past five days, I’ve had terrible seasonal allergies—constant sneezing, a runny nose, and really itchy, watery eyes. I’ve been taking one 10mg Cetirizine tablet every morning, but it’s barely making a dent. Is there a more effective over-the-counter option you’d recommend for these symptoms? 100 BConTrasT Customer Sup-port Hello, I’d like to place an order for pickup from Bella Luna Pizzeria. I need four large pizzas, all with extra cheese, please. The first one should have pepperoni and pineapple, the second one should be the five-cheese blend, the third a taco pizza, and the last one should just have tomatoes, olives, and green peas. 50 Synthetic Everyday Excuse me, good morning. I’m trying to get to the Belém Tower from here at Rossio station. I believe I need to take the 15E tram, is that correct? I’ll need to buy a Viva Viagem card for two people for a single trip; could you tell me the total cost and the approximate travel time around 11 AM? 100 

Table 3: Conversation starters. These prompts simulate a real-life beginning of conversation in high- (top) and low- (bottom) stakes scenarios. Synthetic rows are new. Absolute counts per data source. 

term Estimate Std. Error t p 2.5% 97.5% 

(Intercept) 1.564 0.164 9.535 0.000 1.242 1.886 Group: US B 0.136 0.133 1.022 0.308 -0.127 0.399 Group: US W 0.131 0.135 0.975 0.331 -0.135 0.397 Gender: Woman -0.202 0.120 -1.677 0.096 -0.440 0.036 Model: Phi 4 0.069 0.067 1.035 0.301 -0.062 0.200 Model: Tower+ 0.644 0.069 9.378 0.000 0.509 0.779 Model: Voxtral 0.733 0.068 10.860 0.000 0.601 0.865 

u (Baseline) 0.466 0.030 15.504 0.000 0.407 0.525 Topic: Health 0.332 0.064 5.177 0.000 0.206 0.459 Source: Gemini -0.541 0.084 -6.483 0.000 -0.706 -0.377 Source: MED-MT -0.343 0.109 -3.147 0.002 -0.557 -0.128 Source: Qwen 3 -0.452 0.083 -5.413 0.000 -0.616 -0.287 Group: US B × Gender: Woman 0.070 0.172 0.408 0.684 -0.269 0.410 Group: US W × Gender: Woman 0.363 0.173 2.098 0.038 0.021 0.706 

Table 4: Fixed-effect estimates. Linear mixed-effects model predicting usability ( u) across N = 1 ,738 observations. The model includes group, gender, and their interaction as focal predictors, with conversation topic, translation model, baseline usability, validator translation score, and correction ratio as covariates. Random intercepts are included for participants and conversations. The reference category is Hindi, Man, DeSTA2, BConTrasT, Everyday. CIs are 95% Wald intervals. 

assistants to polish parts of this manuscript. 17 Usability ( u)

> Translation Score
> QA Score
> COMET Kiwi XL
> COMET Kiwi
> COMET
> XCOMET XL
> MetricX 24

Usability ( u)

Translation Score 

QA Score 

COMET Kiwi XL 

COMET Kiwi 

COMET 

XCOMET XL 

MetricX 24 

1.00 0.56 0.63 0.47 0.46 0.42 0.49 0.48 

0.56 1.00 0.64 0.61 0.58 0.56 0.62 0.59 

0.63 0.64 1.00 0.59 0.56 0.52 0.61 0.61 

0.47 0.61 0.59 1.00 0.88 0.80 0.90 0.83 

0.46 0.58 0.56 0.88 1.00 0.82 0.84 0.83 

0.42 0.56 0.52 0.80 0.82 1.00 0.82 0.80 

0.49 0.62 0.61 0.90 0.84 0.82 1.00 0.88 

0.48 0.59 0.61 0.83 0.83 0.80 0.88 1.00 

Spearman correlation 

1.00 

0.75 

0.50 

0.25 

0.00 

0.25 

0.50 

0.75 

1.00 Figure 11: Spearman’s ρ correlation between Usability (u) and translation quality metrics. 

18