Title: 18647_MoCha_Towards_Movie_Grad.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=S9E1nfYPwl

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# MoCha: Towards Movie-Grade Talking Character Generation 

Cong Wei 1,2 ∗

, Bo Sun 2†

, Haoyu Ma 2, Ji Hou 2, Felix Juefei-Xu 2, Zecheng He 2, Xiaoliang Dai 2,Luxin Zhang 2, Kunpeng Li 2, Tingbo Hou 2, Animesh Sinha 2, Peter Vajda 2, Wenhu Chen 1‡

1University of Waterloo 2GenAI, Meta 

{cong.wei,wenhu.chen}@uwaterloo.ca “Two video clips. Person1: Woman with short brown hair… Person2: Man with curly hair…              

> First clip: Person1 inside aspace station… Second clip: Person2 in the same cabin…”

Camera Movement Control                                                

> “Two distinct streams of tears trail down her cheeks as she speaks with an angry expression …”
> “A medium shot of aman interacting warmly with an elephant .the man talks to the camera…"
> “Atilt up shot of aman standing in adimly lit room, speaking to the camera…”

Action Control 

Multi-Character Turn-based Talk 

Talking Character  “Close-up shot of a doctor in a white lab coat over blue scrubs, speaking …” 

Emotion Control 

Figure 1: MoCha is an end-to-end dialogue-centric video generation model that takes only speech 

and text as input, without requiring any auxiliary conditions. More videos are available at https://congwei1230.github.io/MoCha/ 

## Abstract 

Recent advancements in video generation have achieved impressive motion realism, yet they often overlook character-driven storytelling, a crucial task for automated film, animation generation. We introduce Talking Characters , a more realistic task to generate talking character animations directly from speech and text. Unlike talking head, Talking Characters aims at generating the full portrait of one or 

> ∗

Work done during the first author’s internship at GenAI, Meta 

> †

Project Lead 

> ‡

Corresponding Author 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). more characters beyond the facial region. In this paper, we propose MoCha, the first of its kind to generate talking characters. To ensure precise synchronization between video and speech, we propose a localized audio attention mechanism that effectively aligns speech and video tokens. To address the scarcity of large-scale speech-labelled video datasets, we introduce a joint training strategy that leverages both speech-labeled and text-labeled video data, significantly improving generalization across diverse character actions. We also design structured prompt templates with character tags, enabling, for the first time, multi-character conver-sation with turn-based dialogue —allowing AI-generated characters to engage in context-aware conversations with cinematic coherence. Extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations, including human evaluation studies and benchmark com-parisons, demonstrate that MoCha sets a new standard for AI-generated cinematic storytelling, achieving superior realism, controllability and generalization. 

## 1 Introduction 

Automating film production holds immense commercial potential, promising to democratize cinematic-level storytelling by enabling content creators to effortlessly generate films through natural language [ 1– 4]. In film, dialogue plays a central role in conveying narratives. Ideally, creators should be able to specify rich storylines involving multiple characters—whether realistic humans or stylized cartoons—that engage in meaningful dialogue, express emotions, and perform full-body actions. Such talking characters serve as powerful mediums for delivering impactful messages, communi-cating ideas, and engaging audiences. Beyond film, they also enable a wide range of downstream applications, including digital assistants, virtual avatars, advertising, and educational content. Despite impressive progress in video generation, current video foundation models are primarily designed for narration-style, non-dialogue scenes. Models such as SoRA, Pika, Luma, Hailuo, and Kling [ 5–12 ] produce characters with arbitrary lip movements and disconnected facial expressions, lacking control over actual speech content. As a result, these characters appear lifeless and fail to deliver messeage to the audience, limiting the models’ applicability in real-life cinematic production. Meanwhile, speech-conditioned video generation is still in its infancy, primarily focused on simplified talking-head scenarios. Models such as Loopy, Hallo3, and EMO [ 13 – 19 ] are limited to cropped face regions with static cameras, ignoring essential elements such as full-body actions, camera motion, and multi-character interactions. These limitations hinder their characters’ expressiveness and make them unsuitable for realistic, engaging storytelling. To bridge the gap between non-dialogue video generation and constrained talking-head synthesis, we introduce the novel task of Talking Characters , which directly targets the goal of automating dialogue-centric film production. The task is defined as generating lifelike digital characters from natural language and speech inputs that express synchronized speech, realistic emotions, and full-body actions under dynamic camera movements (see section 2). To tackle this task, we propose MoCha , the first end-to-end Diffusion Transformer (DiT) model designed to produce high-quality, movie-grade talking character videos. MoCha demonstrates compelling storytelling capabilities. As shown on the project website ahttps://congwei1230.github.io/MoCha/, we lightly edited MoCha-generated clips into a 1-minute, emotionally engaging narrative, illustrating its potential for real-world filmmaking. MoCha introduces several key technical innovations tailored for this task: • First End-to-End DiT Without Auxiliary Control Signals: MoCha is the first DiT-based model to demonstrate that high-quality lip synchronization and natural character motion can be achieved using only text and speech—without relying on external control signals such as reference images, pose skeletons, or facial keypoints [ 14 , 15 , 20 , 13 , 16 , 21 , 17 ]. Contrary to the dominant belief that audio alone is insufficient, we show that strong audio-visual alignment can emerge purely from end-to-end training. • Localized Audio Attention : We propose a attention mechanism tailored for DiT-based dialogue-diven video generation, which addresses the temporal mismatch between com-pressed video tokens and high-resolution audio inputs (see Sec. 3.2). This design signifi-cantly improves lip-sync accuracy and speech-video alignment. 2• Curriculum-Based Multimodal Training: We introduce a training strategy that combines limited speech-labeled and large-scale text-only video data through a modality-aware cur-riculum. By mixing multimodal and unimodal supervision and progressively increasing visual complexity, our approach improves convergence, enhances generalization, and enables MoCha’s universal controllability via natural language prompts—supporting fine-grained control over character expressions, actions, interactions, camera movement, and scene composition without relying on auxiliary signals. • Multi-Character Conversational Video Generation: MoCha is the first model to support coherent, turn-based dialogue among multiple characters—overcoming the single-speaker limitation of prior methods. This capability enables cinematic, story-driven video synthesis with dynamic character interactions. To evaluate MoCha’s performance, we further curated MoCha-Bench , a benchmark tailored for Talking Characters generation tasks. Both human evaluations and automatic metrics demonstrate that MoCha set a new standard for talking character video generation and represents a significant step toward achieving controllable, narrative-driven video synthesis, with broad applications in film production, animation, virtual assistants, and beyond. 

## 2 Problem Definition: Talking Characters 

We introduce a novel task, Talking Characters , which focuses on generating digital characters that exhibit realistic, human-like behaviors from natural language and speech input. The task is motivated by the goal of automating dialogue-centric film production, going beyond traditional video generation 

that typically focuses on non-dialogue, narration-based scenes. 

Talking Characters differs from conventional talking-head generation—which is restricted to a single face, fixed camera, and square crop—by enabling full-body character synthesis across a range of shot sizes (e.g., close-up, medium, wide) with dynamic camera motion. It supports the generation of one or more characters situated within a contextually appropriate scene. The task is formally defined by the input-output specification and evaluation protocol, in Table 1.                                 

> Aspect Description Input Text Prompt y: Natural language description including (1)environment, (2)character appearance and (3)actions, (4)facing direction and emotion, (5)frame position, (6)camera movement, and (7)shot size.
> Speech Audio a∈RL: Raw waveform signal that drives characters’ lip movements, facial expressions, and body motions.
> Output Video ν∈RT×H×W×3: A rendered video of one or more talking characters (human, 3D cartoon, or animal), where Tis the number of frames and (H, W )is the spatial resolution.
> Eval The generated characters are expected to perform well across the following five axes:
> (1) Lip-Sync Quality: Accurate and temporally aligned lip movements with respect to α.
> (2) Expression Naturalness: Expressive and coherent facial emotions that align with both yand a.
> (3) Action Naturalness: Realistic body gestures reflect described actions in y, synchronized with a.
> (4) Text Alignment: Coherence between visual content and y, including Visual layout, character appearance, and camera motion.
> (5) Visual Quality: High fidelity and temporal consistency, free from visual artifacts. Table 1: Task definition of Talking Characters: formalized inputs (y, a ), output ν, and evaluation criteria.

## 3 Model: MoCha 

In this section, we introduce the MoCha model, the first model to generate talking characters. We begin by outlining its architecture in subsection 3.1, followed by the localized audio attention mechanism in subsection 3.2. Next, we describe the method of generating multiple clips in subsection 3.3. Finally we provide explanation of the training strategy in subsection 3.4. 3Window Cross Attention                                          

> DiT block
> Cross Attention
> 3D VAE
> Self Attention
> xN
> Noisy Video Tokens
> Wav2Vec2
> “Aclose-up shot of awoman
> standing in amodern house,
> speaking to the camera while
> facing straight ahead
> …
> She has shoulder-length dark
> hair
> …
> The background features
> sleek, modern furniture
> …
> She holds asingle rose in
> her hands, gently running
> her fingers along its petals
> …
> The static camera captures
> her face and upper body”
> Projector
> Text
> Tokens
> Projector
> Text
> Encoder
> Speech
> Speech
> Tokens

Figure 2: MoCha Architecture. MoCha is an end-to-end Diffusion Transformer(DiT) that generates video frames from the joint conditioning of speech and text , without relying on any auxiliary signals. Both speech and text inputs are projected into token representations and aligned with video tokens through cross-attention. 

3.1 Audio + Text to Video Diffusion Transformers 

Figure 2 presents the overall architecture of MoCha. Unlike prior works that employ text-to-image (T2I) U-Net [ 14 , 15 , 17 , 22 ] for talking head generation, MoCha is a diffusion transformer (DiT) [ 23 ]. 

Model Architecture. MoCha adopts a fully tokenized design, where both text and speech inputs are projected into token sequences and integrated with video tokens through cross-attention. Given an video ν ∈ RT ×H×W ×3 with T frames, we encode it into a latent representation x0 ∈ Rτ ×h×w×c

using a 3D VAE, which down-samples the video spatially and temporally. We define the temporal down-sampling ratio as r = Tτ . Next, x0 is flattened into a sequence of tokens of size (τ × h × w) × c

and passed to the DiT model fθ (·). Within each DiT block, the model first applies self-attention to the video tokens x0, followed by sequential cross-attention with the text condition tokens y and audio condition tokens α. The audio tokens α ∈ RT ×c is derived from raw waveforms a using Wav2Vec2 [24] and processed through MLPs to align its feature dimension with the video tokens. 

Training Objective. We adopt Flow Matching [ 25 ], which enables efficient simulation of continuous-time dynamics, to train our model. Given a latent video representation x1 ∈ Rτ ×h×w×c

(encoded from the input video), random noise ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ), and a continuous time step t ∈ [0 , 1] , we construct an intermediate latent xt by interpolating between ϵ and x1:

xt = (1 − t) ϵ + t x 1. (1) The model is trained to predict the velocity, defined as the difference between the data and noise: 

vt = dx t

dt = x1 − ϵ. (2) The training loss is then: 

L = Eϵ∼N (0 ,I ), x 1, y, α, t ∈[0 ,1] fθ

 xt, y, α, t  − (x1 − ϵ) 22

, (3) where x1 is the latent video, y and α are text and audio conditions, and fθ (·) is the DiT model. Unlike prior works [ 10 , 14 , 15 , 20 , 13 , 16 , 21 , 17 ], MoCha does not rely on auxiliary objectives such as face or body masking. Instead, it learns speech-video correlations purely from data, using a fully tokenized and end-to-end training approach. 

3.2 Localized Audio Attention 

Most existing talking head generation models rely on 2D diffusion architectures (e.g., U-Net) that generate T frames autoregressively, with each frame νi conditioned directly on its corresponding audio token αi ∈ Rc. This one-to-one mapping between audio and video timesteps naturally ensures tight synchronization. In contrast, diffusion transformer (DiT) architectures depart from this design in two critical ways that complicate temporal alignment: 4Audio                                        

> Token
> (Key/
> Value)
> α
> 3D VAE
> frame1
> Noisy Video
> ν∈ℝ12 ×h×w×3
> frame5
> frame9
> frame1
> Noisy
> Video Token
> (Query) x
> frame5frame9
> α1
> x1
> x2
> x3
> frame12
> Wav2Vec2 + Projector
> Temp
> Down
> r=4
> α4α5α8α9α12
> frame12

Figure 3: MoCha’s Localized Audio Attention. To address the mismatch between com-pressed video tokens and high-resolution audio, MoCha em-ploys a localized attention strat-egy where each video token at-tends only to a narrow window of nearby audio tokens. This promotes precise lip-sync and improves temporal coherence. 

1. Temporal Resolution Mismatch: DiT-based models operate on latent representations produced by a 3D VAE, which temporally compresses videos by a factor of r (commonly r = 4 or 8 in recent T2V models [ 8 , 10 ]). As a result, video tokens span only τ = T /r steps, while audio remains at the original resolution T , eliminating direct alignment. 2. Fully Parallel Decoding: Unlike autoregressive designs, DiT generates all τ latent frames in parallel. Without constraints, naïve cross-attention permits each video token to attend globally to the full audio sequence, which can lead to incorrect associations. To address these challenges, we propose a Localized Audio Attention mechanism that introduces a temporal inductive bias. Inspired by the observation that lip movements depend on short-term phonetic patterns while body gestures and expressions reflect longer-term textual semantics, we constrain each video token’s attention to a limited audio span. Specifically, for a latent video frame x(i) ∈ Rh×w×c at timestep i ∈ { 1, . . . , τ }, we restrict its cross-attention to audio tokens α(j) in the window: 

j ∈ [max(1 , (i−1) r−1) , min( T, ir +1)] . (4) This r+2 -token window corresponds to the uncompressed temporal segment that x(i) summarizes, with one token of padding on each side for context smoothing. This simple yet effective constraint encourages alignment between speech and video while preserving local continuity across frames. 

3.3 Multi-character Turn-based Conversation 

Thanks to the clean and fully tokenized design of MoCha (see subsection 3.1), the model supports multi-clip video generation in exactly the same way as single-clip generation— without any addi-tional architectural modifications . As illustrated in Figure 4, unlike video extension methods that rely on autoregressive generation conditioned on previously generated content, MoCha generates all clips in parallel. It leverages self-attention across video tokens to maintain character consistency across clips and preserve coherence in the surrounding environment. Assuming only one character speaks at a time, we observe that speaker changes in the audio implicitly guide MoCha to transition between clips—without requiring any explicit indicators such as clip tokens [26]. Simultaneously, the text condition y specifies the content of each clip. Formally, given an audio sequence α = {α1, α 2, . . . , α T }, where the tokens correspond to two speakers segmented as α = [ α1, . . . , α rk ] ∥ [αrk +1 , . . . , α T ], with r being the VAE temporal down-sampling ratio and k being an integer index. The model generates the latent video sequence in parallel as: x = fθ (y, α ), where x = {x1, x 2, . . . , x τ }, τ = T /r. The output sequence x can be segmented into two clips aligned with the respective speaker turns: 

x = [ x1, . . . , x k] ∥ [xk+1 , . . . , x τ ].

While MoCha supports seamless multi-clip generation, a challenge lies in prompting—ensuring that character attributes are consistently grounded across clips. This becomes especially difficult when characters interact or reappear in different clips. Naive captioning models typically rely on visual descriptions to refer to characters. As a result, they must repeat detailed appearance descriptions each time a character is mentioned, leading to long, redundant, and confusing prompts. For example in Figure 5. This verbosity not only increases the risk of exceeding token limits (e.g., 256 tokens) but also confuses the model during generation—especially in multi-clip scenarios. 5“ Two video clips. 

Characters: 

- Person1 : Woman with short grey hair, 

medium skin tone, wearing a maroon 

sweater and apron. 

- Person2 : Man with a beard, darker skin 

tone, wearing a black t-shirt and jeans. 

First clip: Person1 stands in a cozy 

kitchen, facing left, speaking warmly 

while preparing food on the counter. Pots 

and pans hang in the background. The 

camera gradually zooms in on Person1 ’s 

face. 

Second clip: Person2 stands on the other 

side of the counter, facing left, smiling 

and replying to Person1 . The camera 

remains static.” 

> Noisy
> Video
> Token

Prompt 

> Video
> Projector

Text 

Encoder Window Cross Attention 

Cross Attention 

Self Attention 

> Speech

xt 

> 0s 5s

Person2 Speech 

> 3D VAE

x

> Projector

Speech 

Encoder 

> Video Token

Person1 Speech  2s  2s  

> Timeline
> 0s 5s

Clip 2 : Person2 Scene Clip 1 : Person1 Scene  2s  2s Timeline 

x1Figure 4: Multi-character Conversation and Character Tagging. MoCha supports generating multi-character conversion with scene cuts. We design a specialized prompt template: it first specifies the number of clips, then introduces the characters along with their descriptions and tags. Each clip is subsequently described using only the character tags , simplifying the prompt while preserving clarity. MoCha leverages self-attention across video tokens to ensure character and environment consistency. The audio signal implicitly guides MoCha when the transition between clips happens. “The first video clip captures a girl aged 10-15 in a                                                         

> green dress waving to another girl dressed in agreen
> shirt with braided hair holding abook... another girl
> dressed in agreen shirt in the middle of the frame
> responds with asmile... Nearby, another girl aged
> 10-15 in ablue hoodie points toward the whiteboard
> while looking at the girl dressed in the girl in a
> green shirt with braided hair .
> Clip1
> Clip2

naïve captioning is long, redundant, and confusing  😊 😔                                                              

> “Two Video Clip.
> Characters:
> (Person1 )Agirl aged 10-15 in agreen dress
> (Person2 )Agirl in agreen shirt with braided hair
> (Person3 )Agirl aged 10-15 in ablue hoodie
> First Clip: Person1 waves to Person2 holding a
> book. Person2 responds with asmile... Nearby,
> Person3 points toward the whiteboard while looking
> at Person1 .
> Second Clip: Person1 is gone. Person2 hands abook
> to Person3 .Person3 gently takes the book with a
> soft smile.”

(Ours) character tagging is clean and compact                                                   

> The second video clip captures the girl in agreen
> dress who stands on the left side of the frame is
> gone. The girl in agreen shirt with braided hair
> hands abook to another girl in ablue hoodie .The
> girl in the blue hoodie gently takes the book with a
> soft smile…”

token#: 145  token#:108 

Figure 5: Character tagging provides more compact and structured prompts compared to naïve captioning. 

We address this by introducing a structured prompt template with fixed keywords and a character tagging mechanism that promotes clarity, compactness, and consistency: • “Two Video Clip. Characters:" Defines a list of characters, each described by visual attributes and assigned a unique tag [27] (e.g., Person1 , Person2 ). • “First clip", “Second clip" Each video segment is described using only the defined character tags. This design significantly reduces redundancy and helps the model reliably associate visual attributes with character actions, even across multiple clips. 

3.4 MoCha Training Strategy 

We identify two key challenges in training high-quality talking character models: (i) Data Scarcity and Limited Diversity: Speech-annotated video datasets are relatively scarce and often lack sufficient visual and semantic diversity, making it difficult to directly train a MoCha model on them. (ii) 

Varying Speech Influence Across Shot Types: The impact of speech on video generation differs between spatial scales: it strongly governs lip and facial movements in close-up shots but has a diminishing influence in medium or wide shots involving full-body motion. Training across all shot types simultaneously may lead to slow convergence. To address both issues, we propose a 

Curriculum-based Multi-modal Training strategy that integrates modality-aware supervision with progressive visual complexity. 

Mixed-Modal Sampling. Our data consists of a balanced mix of multimodal and unimodal data: • 80% Multimodal (speech+text): The majority enables fine-grained audiovisual grounding. 6Stage 0.        

> Stage 1.
> Text
> Close-Up Shot (1 Character)
> 80%
> Stage 2.
> Video-Speech Alignment Strong Weak
> Easy
> Task Complexity
> 40%
> Close-Up Shot (1 Character) Medium Close Shot (1 Character)
> 40%
> Stage 3. 20%
> Close-Up Shot
> (1 Character)
> Text
> 20%
> 20%
> Medium Close Shot
> (1 Character) Medium Shot (1 Character)
> 40%
> Text
> 20%
> Text
> 20%
> Stage 4. 10%
> Close-Up Shot
> (1 Character)
> Text
> 20% 10%
> Medium Close Shot
> (1 Character)
> 20%
> Medium Shot
> (1 Character) 2 Character Multi-Clip Shot
> 40% Hard
> 100%

Figure 6: Progressive Curriculum for Multimodal Training in MoCha. 

MoCha is first pretrained on text-only video data to acquire general visual gen-eration capability. The model is then pro-gressively exposed to speech-conditioned data across different task difficulties. 

• 20% Unimodal (text-only): Text-only video samples offer broader visual diversity and varied camera movements, helping the model retain strong generalization capabilities. In this setting, the speech embedding is replaced with a zero vector before the audio projector. 

Shot-Type-Based Curriculum. We organize training into multiple stages based on shot complexity: • Stage 0: We pretrain on large-scale text-only datasets to establish strong visual priors. • Stages 1–N: We begin with close-up shots, which have high speech-visual correlation, and pro-gressively incorporate more challenging scenarios such as medium/wide shots and multi-character scenes. At each stage, we halve the share of easier examples from the previous stage while maintaining the 80%/20% multimodal-unimodal ratio. This combined strategy allows MoCha to benefit from both abundant text-only data and limited multimodal supervision while progressively mastering harder generation tasks. 

## 4 Experiment 

In this section, we first describe the details of our model in subsection 4.1. We then introduce MoCha-Bench for Talking Characters task and benchmark MoCha against baseline methods in subsection 4.2, and finally, we present an ablation study to analyze the impact of key design choices in Table 4.2. Score                      

> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> Lip-Sync Quality Facial Expression Naturalness Action Naturalness Text Alignment Visual Quality
> MoCha(Ours) Hallo3 SadTalker AniPortrait
> N/A N/A
> 3.85 3.82 3.82 3.85 3.72
> 2.45 2.25 2.13 2.35 2.36
> 2.95
> 1.45
> 1.21 1.16 1.14 1.12 1.00 1.00

Figure 7: Human evaluation scores with SoTA on MoCha-Bench. Scores range from 1 to 4 across five evaluation axes, where a score of 4 reflects performance that is nearly indistinguishable from real video or cinematic production. Participants rated each method on five aspects: lip-sync quality, facial expression naturalness, action naturalness, text-prompt alignment, and visual qualit. MoCha significantly outperforms all baselines across all axes. SadTalker and AniPortrait consistently received a score of 1 for action naturalness, as these methods only perform head movements. Text alignment is marked as not applicable (N/A) for these baselines since they do not accept text input. (see appendix for table version) 

4.1 Implementation Details 

MoCha builds upon a pretrained 30B-parameter MovieGen backbone [ 8 , 10 ], which we extend for speech-conditioned video generation in a fully tokenized, end-to-end setting. The model is configured to produce 128 frames at 24 frames per second, resulting in 5.3-second video clips. Training data is standardized to a spatial resolution of approximately 720 × 720 , with flexible aspect ratios to support various shot types. To enable multimodal learning, we curate two complementary datasets: (1) a large-scale collection of O(100) million text-captioned videos and (2) a smaller set of O(800) 

thousand speech-annotated samples [ 28 ]. Training is distributed across 64 compute nodes. More details of the implementation and the data processing pipeline are provided in the Appendix. 7(Ours)  SadTalker  AniPortrait Hallo3                                             

> Prompt: “A close-up shot of ayoung woman embracing her cat outdoors. She is speaking while facing
> slightly to the right of the frame with an frustrating expression. The background is… she continues
> speaking, her expression remaining tense with anger while still facing slightly to the right…”

/fi ːl/  /la ɪk/ /s ʌm/  /ta ɪ/ /t ʃɛ s/       

> t=12345

Figure 8: Qualitative comparison with SoTA on MoCha-Bench. MoCha not only produces lip movements that align closely with the input speech—enhancing the clarity and naturalness of articulation—but also generates expressive facial animations and realistic, complex actions that faithfully follow the textual prompt. In contrast, SadTalker and AniPortrait exhibit minimal head motion and limited lip synchronization. Hallo3 mostly follows the lip-syncing but suffers from inaccurate articulation, erratic head movements, and noticeable visual artifacts. Since the baselines operate in an image-to-video (I2V) setting, we provide them with the first frame generated by MoCha as input for comparison. The first frame is cropped and resized as needed to meet the requirements of each baseline. 

Method Sync-C ↑ Sync-D ↓

SadTalker 4.727 9.239 AniPortrait 1.740 11.383 Hallo3 4.866 8.963 

Ours 6.333 (+1.47) 8.185 (-0.78) Table 2: Comparison with SoTA on MoCha-Bench. 

We report lip-sync metrics, and MoCha outperforms baselines with superior lip-sync quality. 

Ablation Sync-C ↑ Sync-D ↓

Ours 6.333 8.185 

w/o Curriculum Training 5.659 8.435 w/o Localized Audio Attn. 5.103 8.851 Table 3: Ablation on MoCha-Bench. Removing Local-ized Audio Attn. degrades lip-sync, Curriculum Training improves generalization. 

4.2 Evaluation Baselines. We compare our method with state-of-the-art audio-driven talking face generation models, including SadTalker [ 29 ], AniPortrait [ 30 ], and Hallo3 [ 28 ]. These models generate talking faces conditioned on audio and auxiliary signals, such as the first frame, facial keypoints, or pose skeletons. In contrast, MoCha generates talking characters directly from raw speech and text. 

Benchmark. We introduce MoCha-bench , a benchmark tailored for the Talking Character generation task. It contains 200 diverse samples, each comprising a text prompt and corresponding audio clip. The dataset spans various camera shot angles and camera movement—for example, close-up shots emphasize facial expressions and lip-sync, while medium shots highlight hand gestures and body movement. Scenes cover a wide range of human activities and object interactions (e.g., 

woman holding a coffee cup , professor talking to student ), with characters speaking with various emotions and facing directions. All prompts were manually curated and further enriched using the publicly released LLaMA-3 [31] model to enhance expressiveness and diversity. 

Qualitative Experiments We present qualitative results of MoCha in Figure 1, demonstrating its ability to generate diverse and realistic human motion while maintaining precise speech synchro-nization, even during complex actions. Contrary to the traditional view that treats audio as a weak conditioning signal requiring auxiliary supervision (e.g., pose annotations), our results show that strong audio-visual alignment can emerge purely from end-to-end training. More examples can be found in Appendix and the https://congwei1230.github.io/MoCha/. 8Figure 8 illustrates a side-by-side evaluation of MoCha against baseline methods on MoCha-Bench. Since MoCha generates video directly from speech and text, while baselines operate in an image-to-video (I2V) setup, we ensure fair comparison by providing each baseline with the first frame generated by MoCha (cropped/resized to focus on the head region as needed ). Additional results are provided in the Appendix. MoCha not only produces lip movements that closely align with the speech—enhancing both articulation and naturalness—but also generates expressive facial emotion that accurately follow the textual prompt. In contrast, SadTalker and AniPortrait exhibit minimal head motion and limited lip synchronization. While Hallo3 achieves mostly consistent lip-syncing, it suffers from inaccurate articulation and erratic head movements. 

Quantitative Experiments We evaluate video quality using the automatic metrics to measure the lip-sync quality. Table 2 presents a comparison on the MoCha-Bench. Our model achieves the best scores across all lip-sync metrics, demonstrating the effectiveness of MoCha ’s end-to-end DiT design. These results further confirm that strong audio-visual alignment can emerge purely from audio conditioning without any auxiliary signal. 

Human Evaluations. We conduct a comprehensive human evaluation to compare MoCha against baseline methods on the MoCha-Bench dataset. The evaluation is based on five axes tailored for the Talking Characters task (see section 2), with scores ranging from 1 to 4 (see Appendix). Each model output received 5 independent ratings per example, resulting in over 1000 responses per model. As illustrated in Figure 7, MoCha significantly outperforms all baselines across all five axes, with average scores approaching 4—indicating performance that is nearly indistinguishable from real video or cinematic production. 

Ablation Studies We conduct ablation experiments to assess the individual contributions of MoCha ’s core components. Table 3 presents the impact of each component. (i) We disable our localized audio attention mechanism during training, which results in a noticeable drop in Sync-C and increased Sync-D. We also have design variant comparison with RoPE + global audio attention in the Appendix. 

(ii) We train MoCha exclusively on speech-annotated data. This results in a noticeable drop in lip-sync quality, indicating degraded generalization due to the reduced diversity of the dataset. 

## 5 Related Work 

5.1 Talking Head Generation 

Given an audio sequence and a reference face, pioneer talking-head generation works typically utilize biometric signals such as facial keypoints [ 32 – 35 ], or 3D priors [ 36 –40 , 29 , 41 ] as intermediate motion representation to animate the reference face while ensuring lip synchronization. For example, SadTalker [ 29 ] first extracts 3DMM coefficients from audio and then renders the face in a 3D-aware manner. AniPortrait [ 30 ] predicts 2D facial landmarks from audio and then uses diffusion models to generate a portrait video from the 2D landmark maps. VLOGGER [ 42 ] predicts both 3D expression coefficient and 3D body pose from speech and enables the simultaneous generation of talking-face animations and upper-body gestures. Although effective, videos generated by these methods often lack expressiveness and naturalness due to the limited representation of 2D/3D priors. Recently works, such as EMO [ 18 ] and Hallo [ 17 ], generate audio-driven portrait videos end-to-end using diffusion models, which eliminate intermediate facial representations and learn natural motion from data [ 18 , 17 , 22 , 16 , 43 ]. Hallo3 [ 28 ] builds upon pretrained transformer-based video diffusion models to animate faces with dynamic head poses and background elements. Although these methods can generate natural expressions, they rely on complex auxiliary signals—such as reference images or keypoints—which not only limit the naturalness and flexibility of facial expressions and body movements but also limit the generalization ablity of those methods. 

5.2 Video Diffusion Model 

Recent diffusion-based video models have focused on improving visual quality and temporal co-herence, particularly in text-guided synthesis. Early works such as Make-A-Video [ 44 ], Tune-A-Video [ 45 ], Video LDM [ 46 ], MagicVideo [ 47 ], and AnimateDiff [ 48 ] adapt text-to-image (T2I) backbones to model motion dynamics. More recent methods based on diffusion transformers—such as HunyuanVideo [ 10 ], CogVideoX [ 7 ], MovieGen [ 8]—along with open-source frameworks like 9VideoCrafter [ 6], ModelScopeT2V [ 49 ], and Pyramidal Flow [ 50 ], further enhance spatio-temporal consistency and generation fidelity. However, these models lack mechanisms for aligning speech with character behavior, often producing disjointed lip motions or gestures that fail to reflect spoken content. In contrast, MoCha pioneers a new direction by jointly conditioning on both speech and text to drive character animation—bridging the gap between realistic motion synthesis and dialogue-driven storytelling. 

## 6 Conclusion 

In summary, our work pioneers the task of Talking Characters Generation, pushing beyond traditional talking head synthesis to enable full-body, multi-character animations directly driven by speech and text. We present MoCha, the first framework to address this challenging task, introducing key innovations such as the localized audio attention mechanism for precise audio-visual alignment and a curriculum-based multi-modal training strategy that leverages both speech- and text-labelled data for enhanced generalization. Additionally, our structured prompt design unlocks multi-character, turn-based dialogues with contextual awareness. Comprehensive experiments and human evaluations demonstrate that MoCha delivers state-of-the-art performance in dialogue-driven video generation, marking a significant step toward scalable, cinematic AI storytelling. 

## 7 Acknowledgment 

We thank Xinyi Ji, Tianquan Di, Anqi Xu, Matthew Yu, Emily Luo for providing speech samples used in the MoCha demo. 

## References 

[1] Yupeng Zhou, Daquan Zhou, Ming-Ming Cheng, Jiashi Feng, and Qibin Hou. Storydiffusion: Consistent self-attention for long-range image and video generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:110315–110340, 2024. [2] Sergey Tulyakov, Ming-Yu Liu, Xiaodong Yang, and Jan Kautz. Mocogan: Decomposing motion and content for video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 1526–1535, 2018. [3] Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J Fleet. Video diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,35:8633–8646, 2022. [4] Wilson Yan, Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Videogpt: Video generation using vq-vae and transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.10157 , 2021. [5] Shoufa Chen, Chongjian Ge, Yuqi Zhang, Yida Zhang, Fengda Zhu, Hao Yang, Hongxiang Hao, Hui Wu, Zhichao Lai, Yifei Hu, Ting-Che Lin, Shilong Zhang, Fu Li, Chuan Li, Xing Wang, Yanghua Peng, Peize Sun, Ping Luo, Yi Jiang, Zehuan Yuan, Bingyue Peng, and Xiaobing Liu. Goku: Flow based video generative foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04896 , 2025. [6] Haoxin Chen, Menghan Xia, Yingqing He, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Shaoshu Yang, Jinbo Xing, Yaofang Liu, Qifeng Chen, Xintao Wang, et al. Videocrafter1: Open diffusion models for high-quality video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19512 , 2023. [7] Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06072 , 2024. [8] Adam Polyak, Amit Zohar, Andrew Brown, Andros Tjandra, Animesh Sinha, Ann Lee, Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Chih-Yao Ma, Ching-Yao Chuang, et al. Movie gen: A cast of media foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13720 , 2024. 10 [9] Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Do-minik Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, et al. Stable video diffusion: Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127 , 2023. [10] Weijie Kong, Qi Tian, Zijian Zhang, Rox Min, Zuozhuo Dai, Jin Zhou, Jiangfeng Xiong, Xin Li, Bo Wu, Jianwei Zhang, et al. Hunyuanvideo: A systematic framework for large video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.03603 , 2024. [11] Hila Chefer, Uriel Singer, Amit Zohar, Yuval Kirstain, Adam Polyak, Yaniv Taigman, Lior Wolf, and Shelly Sheynin. Videojam: Joint appearance-motion representations for enhanced motion generation in video models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02492 , 2025. [12] Tim Brooks, Bill Peebles, Connor Holmes, Will DePue, Yufei Guo, Li Jing, David Schnurr, Joe Taylor, Troy Luhman, Eric Luhman, et al. Video generation models as world simulators. 

OpenAI Blog , 1:8, 2024. [13] Rang Meng, Xingyu Zhang, Yuming Li, and Chenguang Ma. Echomimicv2: Towards striking, simplified, and semi-body human animation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10061 , 2024. [14] Linrui Tian, Qi Wang, Bang Zhang, and Liefeng Bo. Emo: Emote portrait alive generating expressive portrait videos with audio2video diffusion model under weak conditions. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 244–260, 2024. [15] Linrui Tian, Siqi Hu, Qi Wang, Bang Zhang, and Liefeng Bo. Emo2: End-effector guided audio-driven avatar video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10687 , 2025. [16] Jianwen Jiang, Chao Liang, Jiaqi Yang, Gaojie Lin, Tianyun Zhong, and Yanbo Zheng. Loopy: Taming audio-driven portrait avatar with long-term motion dependency. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [17] Mingwang Xu, Hui Li, Qingkun Su, Hanlin Shang, Liwei Zhang, Ce Liu, Jingdong Wang, Yao Yao, and Siyu Zhu. Hallo: Hierarchical audio-driven visual synthesis for portrait image animation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08801 , 2024. [18] Linrui Tian, Qi Wang, Bang Zhang, and Liefeng Bo. Emo: Emote portrait alive generating expressive portrait videos with audio2video diffusion model under weak conditions. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 244–260. Springer, 2024. [19] Hongwei Yi, Tian Ye, Shitong Shao, Xuancheng Yang, Jiantong Zhao, Hanzhong Guo, Terrance Wang, Qingyu Yin, Zeke Xie, Lei Zhu, et al. Magicinfinite: Generating infinite talking videos with your words and voice. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05978 , 2025. [20] Xiaozhong Ji, Xiaobin Hu, Zhihong Xu, Junwei Zhu, Chuming Lin, Qingdong He, Jiangning Zhang, Donghao Luo, Yi Chen, Qin Lin, et al. Sonic: Shifting focus to global audio perception in portrait animation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.16331 , 2024. [21] Gaojie Lin, Jianwen Jiang, Jiaqi Yang, Zerong Zheng, and Chao Liang. Omnihuman-1: Rethinking the scaling-up of one-stage conditioned human animation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01061 , 2025. [22] Jiahao Cui, Hui Li, Yao Yao, Hao Zhu, Hanlin Shang, Kaihui Cheng, Hang Zhou, Siyu Zhu, and Jingdong Wang. Hallo2: Long-duration and high-resolution audio-driven portrait image animation. ICLR , 2025. [23] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. ICCV , 2023. [24] Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:12449–12460, 2020. [25] Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747 , 2022. 11 [26] Ziyi Wu, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Willi Menapace, Ivan Skorokhodov, Yuwei Fang, Varnith Chordia, Igor Gilitschenski, and Sergey Tulyakov. Mind the time: Temporally-controlled multi-event video generation. In CVPR , 2025. [27] Feng Liang, Haoyu Ma, Zecheng He, Tingbo Hou, Ji Hou, Kunpeng Li, Xiaoliang Dai, Felix Juefei-Xu, Samaneh Azadi, Animesh Sinha, Peizhao Zhang, Peter Vajda, and Diana Marculescu. Movie weaver: Tuning-free multi-concept video personalization with anchored prompts. CVPR ,2025. [28] Jiahao Cui, Hui Li, Yun Zhan, Hanlin Shang, Kaihui Cheng, Yuqi Ma, Shan Mu, Hang Zhou, Jingdong Wang, and Siyu Zhu. Hallo3: Highly dynamic and realistic portrait image animation with diffusion transformer networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.00733 , 2024. [29] Wenxuan Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Xuan Wang, Yong Zhang, Xi Shen, Yu Guo, Ying Shan, and Fei Wang. Sadtalker: Learning realistic 3d motion coefficients for stylized audio-driven single image talking face animation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 8652–8661, 2023. [30] Huawei Wei, Zejun Yang, and Zhisheng Wang. Aniportrait: Audio-driven synthesis of photore-alistic portrait animation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17694 , 2024. [31] Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 , 2024. [32] KR Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay P Namboodiri, and CV Jawahar. A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the wild. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on multimedia , pages 484–492, 2020. [33] Shuai Shen, Wenliang Zhao, Zibin Meng, Wanhua Li, Zheng Zhu, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Difftalk: Crafting diffusion models for generalized audio-driven portraits animation. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1982–1991, 2023. [34] Yunfei Liu, Lijian Lin, Fei Yu, Changyin Zhou, and Yu Li. Moda: Mapping-once audio-driven portrait animation with dual attentions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 23020–23029, 2023. [35] Weizhi Zhong, Chaowei Fang, Yinqi Cai, Pengxu Wei, Gangming Zhao, Liang Lin, and Guanbin Li. Identity-preserving talking face generation with landmark and appearance priors. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 9729–9738, 2023. [36] Michail Christos Doukas, Stefanos Zafeiriou, and Viktoriia Sharmanska. Headgan: One-shot neural head synthesis and editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International conference on Computer Vision , pages 14398–14407, 2021. [37] Yifeng Ma, Shiwei Zhang, Jiayu Wang, Xiang Wang, Yingya Zhang, and Zhidong Deng. Dreamtalk: When expressive talking head generation meets diffusion probabilistic models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09767 , 2023. [38] Xinya Ji, Hang Zhou, Kaisiyuan Wang, Wayne Wu, Chen Change Loy, Xun Cao, and Feng Xu. Audio-driven emotional video portraits. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 14080–14089, 2021. [39] Xusen Sun, Longhao Zhang, Hao Zhu, Peng Zhang, Bang Zhang, Xinya Ji, Kangneng Zhou, Daiheng Gao, Liefeng Bo, and Xun Cao. Vividtalk: One-shot audio-driven talking head generation based on 3d hybrid prior. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.01841 , 2023. [40] Yuan Gan, Zongxin Yang, Xihang Yue, Lingyun Sun, and Yi Yang. Efficient emotional adapta-tion for audio-driven talking-head generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 22634–22645, 2023. 12 [41] Zhenhui Ye, Tianyun Zhong, Yi Ren, Jiaqi Yang, Weichuang Li, Jiawei Huang, Ziyue Jiang, Jinzheng He, Rongjie Huang, Jinglin Liu, et al. Real3d-portrait: One-shot realistic 3d talking portrait synthesis. ICLR , 2024. [42] Enric Corona, Andrei Zanfir, Eduard Gabriel Bazavan, Nikos Kolotouros, Thiemo Alldieck, and Cristian Sminchisescu. Vlogger: Multimodal diffusion for embodied avatar synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08764 , 2024. [43] Cong Wang, Kuan Tian, Jun Zhang, Yonghang Guan, Feng Luo, Fei Shen, Zhiwei Jiang, Qing Gu, Xiao Han, and Wei Yang. V-express: Conditional dropout for progressive training of portrait video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02511 , 2024. [44] Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792 , 2022. [45] Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Stan Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Wynne Hsu, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion models for text-to-video generation. arxiv 2022. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.11565 , 2022. [46] Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 22563–22575, 2023. [47] Daquan Zhou, Weimin Wang, Hanshu Yan, Weiwei Lv, Yizhe Zhu, and Jiashi Feng. Magicvideo: Efficient video generation with latent diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11018 , 2022. [48] Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Zhengyang Liang, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Maneesh Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04725 , 2023. [49] Jiuniu Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Xiang Wang, and Shiwei Zhang. Modelscope text-to-video technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06571 , 2023. [50] Yang Jin, Zhicheng Sun, Ningyuan Li, Kun Xu, Hao Jiang, Nan Zhuang, Quzhe Huang, Yang Song, Yadong Mu, and Zhouchen Lin. Pyramidal flow matching for efficient video generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05954 , 2024. [51] Brandon Castellano. PySceneDetect. URL https://github.com/Breakthrough/ PySceneDetect .[52] Steffen Schneider, Alexei Baevski, Ronan Collobert, and Michael Auli. wav2vec: Unsupervised pre-training for speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05862 , 2019. [53] AI Meta. Introducing meta llama 3: The most capable openly available llm to date. Meta AI , 2 (5):6, 2024. 13 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide extensive qualitative, quantitative, and human evaluation to support our claims. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide a Limitations and Broader Impact in the Appendix. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [NA] 14 Justification: Our paper focuses on empirical results supported by extensive experiments. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have a detailed discussion about the new model architecture. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? 15 Answer: [No] Justification: We publicly release the evaluation benchmark, but the code is not yet available. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide a detailed discussion of the experiments. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We report error bars in our quantitative evaluations based on repeated human ratings. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). 16 • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide a detailed discussion of the compute resources. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: Our research conform in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have border impacts paragraph. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. 17 • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have a paragraph about this. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We cited the original paper. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. 18 • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide a document for the public available benchmark. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have a paragraph for the instructions. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [No] Justification: Our study includes human evaluations of model outputs. Participants were volunteers from our institution, informed of the task, and no sensitive or personal data was collected. Given the low-risk nature of the study, IRB approval was not required under our institution’s policy. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. 19 • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [Yes] Justification: We use an LLM to enrich video descriptions and prompts for our evaluation benchmark and training data. We describe our data processing pipeline in appendix. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 20 Technical Appendices and Supplementary Material 

In this appendix, we provide details of the model architecture in Appendix B, training setting in Appendix C, data processing pipeline in Appendix D, and we provide comprehensive ablation studies and experiment results in Appendix A. We discuss limitations and broader impact in Appendix E and Appendix F 

## A Experiments 

A.1 Audio Cross-Attention Design Ablation 

To better understand how to inject audio conditioning into DiT-based video diffusion models, we conduct a systematic design study comparing multiple audio cross-attention mechanisms. Due to the high computational cost of training the full 30B MoCha model, we perform our ablation using a smaller 4B DiT backbone pretrained on MovieGen [ 8 ], and fine-tune it on 400 K close-up, single-character clips with audio annotations for 200 K training steps. All models share identical training hyperparameters and differ only in the design of the audio cross-attention module. We evaluate lip-sync quality on MoCha-Bench using the SyncNet-based metrics Sync-C ( ↑) and Sync-D ( ↓). Results are summarized in Table 4. 

Variants. Below, we define the attention query q ∈ RN ×d as the video tokens, and key/value 

k, v ∈ RT ×d as the audio tokens. We denote A(q, k, v ) as the standard attention function. • Naive Audio Cross-Attention: Each video token attends to all audio tokens without positional encoding: 

z = A(q, k, v ).

• + Learnable Positional Embedding: Audio tokens are augmented with learnable positional embeddings pj initialized to zero: 

z = A(q, k + p, v ).

• + Sinusoidal Positional Embedding: Instead of learned pj , we add fixed sinusoidal embed-dings: 

z = A(q, k + Sinusoidal (j), v ).

• + Rotary Positional Embedding (RoPE): RoPE is applied by rotating the queries and keys: 

z = A(RoPE (q), RoPE (k), v ).

• Localized Audio Attention (proposed): Each video token qi attends only to a window of audio tokens k[j0:j1] centered on its corresponding temporal segment (see Section 3.2): 

zi = A(qi, k [j0:j1], v [j0:j1]),

where j0 = max(1 , (i−1) r−1) and j1 = min( T, ir +1) .• Localized Audio Attention + RoPE: We additionally apply RoPE to q and k within the window. 

Findings. As shown in Table 4, the naive attention baselines perform poorly in lip-sync accu-racy. Adding positional information—especially sinusoidal or RoPE embeddings—significantly improves performance, suggesting that positional priors are critical for learning speech-video align-ment. However, our proposed Localized Audio Attention consistently outperforms all other variants, demonstrating the effectiveness of constrained temporal windows for resolving the resolution mis-match between video and audio tokens. Interestingly, adding RoPE to the Localized Attention variant slightly degrades performance, indicat-ing potential interference between the inductive bias introduced by RoPE and the explicit temporal alignment imposed by windowing. 21 Method Sync-C ↑ Sync-D ↓

DiT-4B + Localized Audio Attention ( MoCha-4B ) 5.692 8.403 

DiT-4B + Localized Audio Attention + RoPE 5.027 9.038 DiT-4B + Naive Audio Attention + RoPE 4.872 8.893 DiT-4B + Naive Audio Attention + Sinusoidal Embedding 4.747 8.986 DiT-4B + Naive Audio Attention + Learnable Embedding 2.540 10.363 DiT-4B + Naive Audio Attention 2.364 10.385 Table 4: Comparison of Audio Cross-Attention Variants on MoCha-Bench. We report lip-sync metrics. The proposed Localized Audio Attention achieves the best performance. 

A.2 Ablation of Curriculum-Based Multimodal Training Strategy 

We conduct an ablation study to assess the effectiveness of our proposed Curriculum-based Multi-modal Training strategy (described in Section 3.4), which is designed to address two core challenges: (i) data scarcity and limited diversity in speech-annotated datasets, and (ii) varying speech relevance across spatial scales in different shot types. To evaluate this strategy, we compare the full MoCha-30B model with two ablated variants: • w/o Curriculum Training: Trained on mixed modalities (speech and text-only) but without curriculum progression (i.e., trained directly on mixed data with full shot-type complexity from the beginning). • w/o Mixed Multimodal Training: Trained solely on speech-annotated videos, without any text-only data or curriculum scheduling. All models use the same architecture and are trained for an equal number of steps. We report both automatic lip-sync metrics (Sync-C ↑, Sync-D ↓) and three human evaluation metrics from MoCha-Bench: Text Alignment , Visual Quality , and Action Naturalness (detailed in Section A.4). Qualitative examples can be found on the https://congwei1230.github.io/MoCha/. As shown in Table 5, removing the curriculum phase ( w/o Curriculum Training ) causes a moderate performance drop across all metrics, confirming the benefit of staged training that gradually increases visual complexity. Although trained for the same number of steps, the non-curriculum baseline converges more slowly and underperforms. The w/o Mixed Multimodal Training variant—trained only on limited speech-annotated data—performs significantly worse, especially on Text Alignment and Action Naturalness . This confirms that unimodal speech-driven training causes overfitting to front-facing talking-face data, impairing the model’s ability to generalize to diverse prompts for diverse scenes and full-body activities. These results validate the necessity of both modality mixing and curriculum progression for robust and generalizable talking character generation.                          

> Method Sync-C ↑Sync-D ↓Text Alignment ↑Visual Quality ↑Action Naturalness ↑
> MoCha-30B (with Curriculum) 6.333 8.185 3.85 3.72 3.82
> w/o Curriculum Training 5.659 8.435 3.17 3.31 3.27 w/o Mixed Multimodal Training 5.798 8.231 2.71 2.91 2.97

Table 5: Ablation of Curriculum-Based Multimodal Training Strategy on MoCha-Bench. We report lip-sync metrics (Sync-C ↑, Sync-D ↓) and human evaluation scores across three axes. 

A.3 Ablation of Character Tagging Strategy 

We ablate the effectiveness of the Character Tagging strategy introduced in Section 4 for handling multi-character conversations with turn-based dialogue. This strategy is particularly important in multi-clip scenes, where multiple characters appear across different segments and speaker transitions are inferred from the audio input alone. 22 Our tagging mechanism assigns a unique identifier (e.g., Person1 , Person2 ) to each character intro-duced at the beginning of the prompt. These tags are then reused across individual clip descriptions, allowing for clear, consistent references without repeating verbose appearance descriptions. This structured prompting significantly reduces prompt length and improves character consistency (see Figure 5). To evaluate the impact of character tagging, we compare the full MoCha-30B model (with tagging) to a baseline trained with naïve captioning—where detailed character descriptions are repeated verbosely in each clip. Both models are evaluated on the turn-based dialogue subset of MoCha-Bench. As shown in Table 6, removing character tagging results in a drastic drop in Text Alignment , indicating the model often confuses which character appears in which scene. Qualitative examples show that, without tagging, the model may generate scene-swap artifacts, fail to transition characters correctly between clips, or maintain similar lip-sync for mismatched dialogue. We also observe degradation in Visual Quality , as the model occasionally blends inconsistent character features across clips. Overall, these results highlight that character tagging is essential for multi-character consistency and semantic alignment in dialogue-driven video generation.                     

> Method Sync-C ↑Sync-D ↓Text Alignment ↑Visual Quality ↑Action Naturalness ↑
> MoCha-30B (with Character Tagging) 4.951 8.601 3.81 3.64 3.69
> w/o Character Tagging 4.465 8.792 2.01 2.15 3.03

Table 6: Ablation of Character Tagging on MoCha-Bench (Turn-Based Dialogue Category). 

We report lip-sync metrics (Sync-C ↑, Sync-D ↓) and human evaluation scores. Character tagging improves semantic consistency and reduces scene confusion in multi-clip dialogue scenarios. 

A.4 MoCha-Bench Human Evaluation 

We conduct a comprehensive human evaluation to compare MoCha against baseline methods on the MoCha-Bench dataset. The evaluation is based on five axes tailored for the Talking Characters task , with scores ranging from 1 to 4. Each model output received 5 independent ratings per example, resulting in over 1000 responses per model. We provide the evaluation guidance as below. Besides the text guideline, we also include some visual examples to better help the annotators to judge. This document provides evaluation guidelines, including axis definitions, scoring rubrics, and instruc-tions for annotators. Visual examples are provided separately to support consistent judgments. 

Task Overview 

Each evaluation sample consists of: • A generated video with audio, • A text prompt describing the scene and character behavior. Your task is to evaluate how well the generated video across five dimensions. 

Evaluation Axes 

• Lip-Sync Quality: Measures how accurately the character’s lip movements align with the spoken audio. 

Scale: 1 – Not aligned at all, 2 – Weak alignment, 3 – Mostly aligned, 4 – Perfectly aligned. • Facial Expression Naturalness: Evaluates whether facial expressions and lip-sync appear natural and contextually appropriate, without seeming robotic or exaggerated. 

Scale: 1 – Completely unnatural, 2 – Noticeably synthetic or stiff, 3 – Mostly natural and believable, 4 – Indistinguishable from real or cinematic performance. • Action Naturalness: Assesses how naturally the character’s body movements and gestures align with the audio. 

Scale: 1 – Completely unnatural, 2 – Noticeably unnatural, 3 – Mostly natural, 4 – Indistin-guishable from real movie or TV characters. 23 • Text Alignment: Measures how well the generated actions, expressions, and presence of characters follow the behaviours described in the prompt. 

Scale: 1 – No alignment (e.g., missing character or major misbehavior), 2 – Partial alignment, 3 – Mostly aligned, 4 – Perfect alignment with the prompt. • Visual Quality: Evaluates the overall visual fidelity, including image sharpness, coherence, and absence of rendering issues such as artifacts, glitches, or anatomical distortions (e.g., broken limbs or unnatural body proportions). 

Scale: 1 – Severe artifacts, 2 – Noticeable artifacts, 3 – Mostly artifact-free, 4 – Flawless visuals. 

Annotation Instructions 

1. Review the prompt and watch the full video at least once. 

2. Evaluate each axis independently. Use the provided 1–4 scale. Do not assign the same score across all axes unless truly justified. 3. Use the full scale range. Assign low or high scores as needed. Avoid defaulting to the midpoint. 4. If no character is present in the video, assign a score of 1 for Text Alignment .FAQ Q: What if the same scene includes multiple characters? 

A: Focus your evaluation on the central or speaking character as described in the prompt. Other characters may be present, but your ratings should reflect the behavior and alignment of the primary subject. 

Q: What if the video does not include a character? 

A: If the generated video fails to include the main character described in the prompt (e.g., an empty scene or wrong subject), you should assign a score of 1 for Text Alignment.                           

> Method Lip-Sync Quality Facial Expression Naturalness Action Naturalness Text Alignment Visual Quality
> Hallo3 [17] 2.45 2.25 2.13 2.35 2.36 SadTalker [29] 1.21 1.14 1.00 N/A 2.95 AniPortrait [30] 1.16 1.12 1.00 N/A 1.45
> MoCha (Ours) 3.85 (+1.40) 3.82 (+1.57) 3.82 (+1.69) 3.85 (+1.50) 3.72 (+1.36)

Table 7: Human evaluation scores on MoCha-Bench. Scores range from 1 to 4 across five evaluation axes, where a score of 4 reflects performance that is nearly indistinguishable from real video or cinematic production. Participants rated each method on five aspects: lip-sync quality, facial expression naturalness, action naturalness, text-prompt alignment, and visual quality. MoCha significantly outperforms prior methods across all categories. Green numbers indicate absolute improvements ( ∆) over the second-best method (underlined). SadTalker and AniPortrait consistently received a score of 1 for action naturalness, as these methods only perform head movements. 

A.5 MoCha-Bench Qualitative Comparison 

Figure 8 presents a direct comparison between MoCha and baseline methods on MoCha. All baselines require a reference image as an auxiliary input. To ensure fairness, we first generate a video using MoCha and then use its first frame as the reference image for all baseline models. For models that do not support arbitrary aspect ratios, we crop the first frame to focus on the head region before feeding it into their networks. We provide two groups of qualitative comparisons: one featuring close-up shots and the other medium shots. The close-up group emphasizes lip-sync quality, head movement, and facial expressions, while the medium shot group focuses on hand movements during speech. MoCha not only produces lip movements that closely align with the input speech—enhancing both articulation and naturalness—but also generates expressive facial animations and realistic, coordinated actions that accurately follow the textual prompt. In contrast, SadTalker and AniPortrait exhibit minimal 24 head motion and limited lip synchronization. While Hallo3 achieves mostly consistent lip-syncing, it suffers from inaccurate articulation and erratic head movements. In the medium shot comparisons, Hallo3 also introduces noticeable visual artifacts, particularly during complex actions. 

## B MoCha Model Architecture 

B.1 3D VAE 

Our 3D-VAE is based on a variational autoencoder and compresses the input pixel space video ν

of shape ∈ RT ×H×W ×3 into a lower-dimensional, continuous latent representation x0 of shape 

τ × h × w × c, . In our implementation, we compress the input 8× across the spatial dimension while 4× across the temporal dimension, i.e., H/h = W/w = 8 and T /τ = 4 The latent channel dimensionality is fixed at c = 16 for all experiments reported herein. 

B.2 Text Encoder 

We employ a triad of text encoding architectures—UL2, ByT5, and a Long-prompt variant of MetaCLIP—to equip the backbone with both high-level semantic and fine-grained character-level textual comprehension. Each encoder generates a sequence of 256 token embeddings. To unify these heterogeneous representations, we apply dedicated linear projection layers and LayerNorm to each encoder’s output, transforming them into the model dimension 6144-dimensional feature space. The resulting normalized embeddings from all three streams are then concatenated to produce the final comprehensive text representation fed into the backbone. Among these, the MetaCLIP encoder specializes in generating text features inherently aligned with visual modalities, optimizing performance for cross-modal generation tasks. UL2, conversely, excels at encoding deep linguistic reasoning and semantics, While ByT5 captures character-level details, making it effective for encoding visual text. 

B.3 Audio Encoder 

Our audio pipeline is powered by Wav2Vec2, but instead of relying solely on its final output, we extract and stitch together the embeddings from all 12 internal layers. This approach gives us a deeper, layered view of the audio content, with each layer contributing a 768-dimensional slice to the overall representation. After running the audio through Wav2Ve2’s tokenizer, we stretch or compress the resulting sequence using linear interpolation before Before the audio hits Wav2Vec2. So that we end up with the same number of audio features as there are video frames—effectively assigning a unique audio token to each frame. To provide each frame’s audio token with extra context, we expand its feature vector by gluing on the tokens from the five frames before and after it. So for any given frame f , the final embedding is built as A(f ) = [ A(f − 5) , . . . , A (f ), . . . , A (f + 5)] . This chunky, context-aware audio feature then passes through a straightforward two-layer neural net (an MLP with a hidden size of 512) which reshapes it into the 6144-dimensional token α(f ) needed by our model’s backbone. 

B.4 DiT Architecture 

The core architectural hyperparameters of our MoCha-30B DiT backbone are provided in Table 8. 

Localized Audio Cross-Attention. To incorporate temporal locality in the audio stream, we adopt a windowed cross-attention mechanism with a window size of r + 2 = 6 , where r = 4 is the temporal downsampling factor of the video encoder. For a latent video frame x(i) ∈ Rh×w×c at timestep 

i ∈ { 1, . . . , τ }, attention is restricted to audio tokens α(j) falling within the interval: 

j ∈ [max (1 , (i − 1) r − 1) , min ( T, ir + 1)] , (5) which corresponds to the original (pre-downsampled) temporal span of x(i) with one token of padding on each side to enable smoother context transitions at boundaries. 

Modality Integration Pathway. Each attention block integrates modalities in a sequential manner. It begins with video self-attention, followed by localized audio cross-attention and then text cross-25 Layers Model Dimension FFN Dimension Attention Heads Activation Function Normalization      

> 48 6144 16384 48 SwiGLU RMSNorm

Table 8: Core architecture hyperparameters for the MoCha-30B Transformer. The model has 30 billion parameters in the Transformer stack alone, excluding auxiliary components such as text embedding models, speech embedding models, and the 3D-VAE. attention. Each stage incorporates a residual connection, modulated by a scalar weight. In our implementation, these residual weights are fixed to 1. The full process is given by: (1) zout video = SelfAttn video (zin )

(2) zout text = CrossAttn text (zout video , y) + λtext · zout video 

(3) zout audio = CrossAttn audio (zout text , α) + λaudio · zout text 

where: • zin is the input latent sequence. • SelfAttn video denotes self-attention over video tokens. • CrossAttn audio (·, α) performs localized cross-attention with audio tokens α.• CrossAttn text (·, y) performs cross-attention with global text tokens y.• λaudio and λtext are residual weights, both set to 1 in our implementation. This staged fusion enables progressive enrichment of the video representation by incorporating auditory and textual information, while preserving intermediate features through residual addition. 

## C MoCha Training 

We provide the training details for our MoCha-30B model in Table 9. We used a constant learning rate scheduler with 2000 warm-up steps. We use a Progressive Curriculum for Multimodal Training as describe in subsection 3.4. 

Mixed-Modal Sampling. Our data consists of a balanced mix of multimodal and unimodal data: • 80% Multimodal (speech+text): The majority enables fine-grained audiovisual grounding. • 20% Unimodal (text-only): Text-only video samples offer broader visual diversity and varied camera movements, helping the model retain strong generalization capabilities. In this setting, the speech embedding is replaced with a zero vector before the audio projector. 

Shot-Type-Based Curriculum. We organize training into multiple stages based on shot complexity: • Stage 0: We pretrain on large-scale text-only datasets to establish strong visual priors. • Stages 1–N: We begin with close-up shots, which have high speech-visual correlation, and pro-gressively incorporate more challenging scenarios such as medium/wide shots and multi-character scenes. At each stage, we halve the share of easier examples from the previous stage while maintaining the 80%/20% multimodal-unimodal ratio. This combined strategy allows MoCha to benefit from both abundant text-only data and limited multimodal supervision while progressively mastering harder generation tasks. We build MoCha based on Movie Gen Backbone. The Stage 0 training is included in the Movie Gen backbone pertaining. Then we add the speech cross attention and speech projector to the Movie Gen backbone to build MoCha. During Stages 1-N training, We full-finetuning the entire 30B MoCha model while freezing the text encoder and speech encoder and text projector. Throughout training, all 26 input examples are resized to a resolution of approximately 720 px, preserving their original aspect ratios. 

Stage #GPUs Global bs LR Shot Types #Iters #Audio Samples #Text Samples 

0 1024 512 1e-5 Images / Videos 200K 100M –1 512 512 1e-5 Close-Up (1 Char) 200K 400k 100M 2 512 512 1e-5 Close-Up / Medium Close (1 Char) 200K 300k 100M 3 512 512 1e-5 Close-Up / Medium / Medium Close (1 Char) 100K 200k 100M 4 512 512 1e-5 Close / Medium / Multi-Char / Multi-Clip 100K 100k 100M 

Table 9: Progressive Curriculum for Multimodal Training in MoCha. Stages gradually increase in temporal and compositional complexity, progressing from static images and short clips to multi-shot, multi-character, dialogue-driven video. Residual text supervision is maintained throughout. 

## D Data Processing Pipeline Step 1. Speech Scene Filter  Step 2. Prominent Characters Filter by LLM.                                

> Reason:
> The video shows agroup of men in abar.
> But none of them appear to be the main
> focus of the scene or occupy a
> significant portion of the frame.
> Decision: False
> Prompt: Any Prominent Characters?

Step 3. Captioning 

⑤ Llama3                                               

> ②Noise/Music Remover
> Prompt:
> 1. Begin with ageneral description of the scene.
> 2. Description of Character’s APPEARANCE and POSITION
> from Left to right.
> 3. For each character
> -Description whether they are SPEAKING or NOT .
> -Description of their EMOTIONS and BODY language.
> -Description of their ACTIONS .
> 4. Description of Background
> 5. Conclusion of CAMERA Movements

③Llama3                                            

> “…
> The man sits to the RRIGHT SIDE of
> the frame.
> …
> The man is NOT speaking .He is
> looking down at his phone,
> occasionally raising his head
> …
> The woman appears ANGERY and WORRIED.
> …
> The woman's HANDS are GESTURING in
> front of her as she speaks, and she
> is LOOKING directly toward the man
> …”

③ Speech Detector 

① Scene Separator 

③ Speech Detector  

> ②Noise/Music Remover

⑥ Motion Filter 

⑦ Lip Sync Filter 

⑧ Llama3 

④ Wav2Vec2 

Figure 9: Data Processing Pipeline. Our four-stage pipeline includes: (1) Speech Scene Filtering ,(2) Prominent Character Filtering , (3) Motion and Lip-Sync Verification , and (4) Scene Cap-tioning . Together, these steps produce high-quality, speech-aligned training samples. To ensure high-quality supervision for speech-conditioned video generation, we develop a four-stage data processing pipeline, as illustrated in Figure 9. Each stage is designed to filter noisy data and produce rich, structured annotations for training. • (1) Speech Scene Filtering: Raw videos are first segmented into scenes using PySceneDe-tect [ 51 ]. We then detect and retain segments containing clean, spoken audio by removing clips with excessive background noise or dominant music. For valid segments, we apply noise suppression and extract speech embeddings using Wav2Vec2 [52, 24]. 27 • (2) Prominent Character Filtering: To focus on scenes with clearly visible speakers, we use an LLM-based filter that analyzes visual cues and removes clips lacking a central character figure. This step emphasizes narrative relevance and visual clarity. • (3) Motion and Lip-Sync Verification: We further refine the data by checking for facial and body motion aligned with speech. Segments without meaningful movement or with weak audio-visual correspondence are excluded. • (4) Scene Captioning: Finally, a large language model [ 53 ] is used to generate structured captions for each clip. These include detailed descriptions of character appearance, spatial layout, speaking behavior, emotional expression, and physical gestures—enabling rich conditioning during training. This pipeline results in a curated dataset of approximately 300 hours of high-quality, speech-aligned video content, totaling around 800K annotated samples. 

## E Limitations 

Despite the strong performance of our model across various talking character scenarios, we identify several limitations that affect generation quality under certain conditions. We provide corresponding examples on the https://congwei1230.github.io/MoCha/. 

Failure to Lip Sync in Wide or Extreme Wide Shots: When the input caption is too vague—particularly lacking details about facial attributes or shot type—the model may default to generating a wide or extreme wide shot. In such cases, the character often appears too far from the camera, and the lip region contains only a few pixels. As a result, the model may fail to perform accurate lip synchronization. Example prompt: “A man playing skateboard at a skatepark.” Multiple Characters in Scene: While the model is generally capable of making the intended character speak in scenes with multiple characters, we observed occasional confusion about which character should be speaking once both characters’ face are visible in a single shot. This can lead to degraded lip-sync quality. The limitation likely stems from a scarcity of similar multi-character examples in the training data, where two or more characters appear in the same shot and speak to the camera. 

Example prompt: “A medium shot set in a dimly lit tavern. The central figure, a rugged man with long, wet-looking hair and a thick beard, sits on a rustic wooden bench. He wears a weathered wool cloak over leather armor, evoking the image of a battle-hardened warrior. His expression is intense as he speaks, holding a short sword in his right hand. To his left, another man with tied-back hair and fur-lined garments watches him closely.” Over-Expression with High Speech CFG: Increasing the speech classifier-free guidance (CFG) value beyond the default (e.g., from 7.5 to 12) can cause the model to generate characters with overly expressive facial and body motions. While this can improve speech emphasis, it may also reduce realism or break immersion in otherwise grounded scenes. Example prompt: “A tracking shot circling around the man as he ties a tie over his blue suit. He speaks to the camera while adjusting the knot, maintaining eye contact throughout.” 

## F Broader Impact 

The goal of MoCha is to advance the field of dialogue-centric video generation and enable creative pro-fessionals—such as filmmakers, animators, educators, and content creators—to produce emotionally engaging character-driven videos using natural language and speech inputs. By lowering the barrier to cinematic-quality storytelling, this technology democratizes digital media production and unlocks new possibilities for interactive entertainment, educational content, and virtual communication. However, as with any powerful generative technology, there are important societal and ethical considerations to address. 

Misuse and Synthetic Media Risks. The use of speech-driven character generation raises concerns around the potential misuse of synthetic media. While MoCha synthesizes characters and scenes entirely from noise, without cloning real human identities or voices, there is still a risk that the gener-ated videos could be misrepresented as real footage—particularly if aligned with real-world audio. This raises issues of misinformation, media authenticity, and potential psychological manipulation. 28 SadTalker  AniPortrait Hallo3                                                                    

> Prompt: “A medium shot of aman speaking while adjusting his glasses …As he talks, he first
> takes off his glasses, then puts them back on …”
> Prompt: “A close-up shot of ayoung woman embracing her cat outdoors. She is speaking while
> facing slightly to the right of the frame with an frustrating expression. The background is… she
> continues speaking, her expression remaining tense with anger while still facing slightly to the
> right…”

/fi ːl/  /la ɪk/ /s ʌm/  /ta ɪ/ /t ʃɛ s/ 

> MoCha (Ours)  SadTalker  AniPortrait Hallo3 MoCha (Ours)

Figure 10: Qualitative comparison between MoCha and baselines on MoCha-Bench. MoCha not only produces lip movements that align closely with the input speech—enhancing the clarity and naturalness of articulation—but also generates expressive facial animations and realistic, complex actions that faithfully follow the textual prompt. In contrast, SadTalker and AniPortrait exhibit minimal head motion and limited lip synchronization. Hallo3 mostly follows the lip-syncing but suffers from inaccurate articulation, erratic head movements, and noticeable visual artifacts. Since the baselines operate in an image-to-video (I2V) setting, we provide them with the first frame generated by MoCha as input for comparison. The first frame is cropped and resized as needed to meet the requirements of each baseline. Unlike deepfake systems that typically manipulate real people’s faces, MoCha does not operate on real identity inputs. All visual content is generated from scratch using text and speech prompts. Nevertheless, the audio guidance—if paired with sensitive or impersonated speech—could still be used to create misleading portrayals. To mitigate this risk, we recommend responsible disclosure practices and support for watermarking or synthetic media detection tools. 

Privacy and Consent. Although MoCha does not require real human images or voices for generation, broader deployment of similar technologies in the future may prompt privacy concerns, especially if adapted to personalized avatars or voice-based likenesses. To ensure responsible use, it is critical to uphold strict data privacy standards, including transparent data usage policies, informed consent when training on human likenesses, and tools for individuals to opt out of potential misuse. 29 Prompt: “A close-up shot of a man sitting on a dark gray couch… Behind the man are three white cylindrical light                                                                                                                  

> fixtures with yellow lights inside them… the man continues to speak to the camera while he holds alit cigar, the
> smoke curling gently into the air …”
> Prompt: “A medium shot of ayoung man aged 25 to 35 is sitting in the living room in aleisurely environment… He is
> live-streaming, sitting in front of adesk with alaptop in front of him. His demeanor is relaxed and friendly,
> gesturing with his hands while speaking …”
> Prompt: “A close-up shot of ayoung blonde woman sitting in an airplane seat, facing slightly to the right as she
> talks on the phone with aworried expression. As the video progresses, she continues speaking and eventually turns
> to look out the window …”

Figure 11: Qualitative results of MoCha on MoCha-Bench . MoCha not only generates lip move-ments that are well-synchronized with the input speech, but also produces natural facial expressions that reflect the prompt along with realistic hand gestures and action movements 

Bias and Representation. As with many generative models, outputs from MoCha may reflect biases present in the underlying training data—particularly in terms of character appearance, behavior, or cultural representation. Careful dataset curation and evaluation are needed to ensure diversity and inclusiveness, and to avoid reinforcing harmful stereotypes or excluding underrepresented groups in generated media. 

Ethical Deployment. We encourage deployment of MoCha only in contexts that respect consent, truthfulness, and creative integrity. As the technology matures, we advocate for the establishment of community-driven ethical guidelines, collaboration with media regulators, and public education on the capabilities and limits of AI-generated video. By proactively identifying and addressing these risks, we aim to support the safe and beneficial advancement of talking character technologies and ensure they are developed and applied in ways that are ethical, inclusive, and socially responsible. 30