Title: Audio-Oscar: A Multi-Agent System for Complex Audio Scene Generation, Orchestration, and Refinement

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.07397v1

Published Time: Mon, 08 Jun 2026 01:13:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
## Audio-Oscar: A Multi-Agent System for Complex Audio Scene Generation, Orchestration, and Refinement 

Yifan Duan 1,2, * , Qixiang Xu 1, * , Hengtao Wu 1, * , Zhanxun Liu 1,2,3 ,Wenhao Guan 2,4 , Junxi Liu 1, Ziyang Ma 1,2 , Kelu Xu 5, Xie Chen 1,2, †

,

> 1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, X-LANCE Lab, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 

> 2

Shanghai Innovation Institute, 3Shanghai AI Laboratory, 4Xiamen University, 

> 5

State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, China 

ziye_hitsz@163.com, chenxie95@sjtu.edu.cn 

Abstract 

In recent years, audio generation has made sig-nificant progress in tasks such as text-to-speech (TTS), text-to-audio (TTA) and text-to-music (TTM). However, generating long-form and controllable audio from complex audio scene descriptions remains a significant challenge, as such scenes often require coordinated speech, sound effects, music, songs, temporal struc-ture, and post-production. In this work, we introduce Audio-Oscar , a multi-agent frame-work for generating audio from complex de-scriptions. Audio-Oscar coordinates a set of specialist agents, each responsible for a differ-ent aspect of the audio scene, including char-acter modeling and voice design, speech gen-eration, fine-grained timeline planning, model selection, non-speech generation, and audio post-production. Audio-Oscar further incor-porates feedback-driven refinement. In addi-tion, to address the lack of suitable benchmarks for evaluating audio generation from complex audio scene descriptions, we construct ASG-Bench , an Audio Scene Generation Benchmark containing both scene descriptions paired with reference audio and text-only scene descrip-tions. Each scene is annotated with target au-dio events and temporal statements to evalu-ate whether the generated audio faithfully re-alizes the required scene content and tempo-ral structure. Experimental results show that Audio-Oscar can effectively generate audio that matches complex scene descriptions. Project samples are available at https://audiooscar. github.io/ . Our code is available at https: //github.com/ziye26/Audio-Oscar .

1 Introduction 

Audio is an important component of multimedia content and plays an important role in scenarios such as videos and podcasts. In recent years, with 

> *Equal contribution.
> †Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Overview of Audio-Oscar. Given an audio scene description as input, it coordinates multiple agents and employs different models for generation, composi-tion, and refinement to produce the final audio output. 

the rapid development of various generative mod-els, audio generation has made significant progress in tasks like text-to-speech (TTS), text-to-audio (TTA) and text-to-music (TTM) (Chen et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2026; Liu et al., 2024; Evans et al., 2025; Yuan et al., 2026). The models can now effec-tively generate high-quality speech, environmen-tal sounds and music content (Du et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025; Gong et al., 2026). However, in com-plex audio scenarios, audio is often composed of a combination of multiple sound elements, such as speech, background music, ambient sounds and event sound effects. Existing audio generation mod-els often focus on single task generation and are unable to meet the demands of generating complex audio. Increasingly, recent works have attempted to use a unified model to cover different types of audio generation, including speech, music, and environ-1

> arXiv:2606.07397v1 [cs.SD] 5 Jun 2026

mental sounds, and have begun to show preliminary capabilities to generate complex mixed audio (Liu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024a; Vyas et al., 2023; AI et al., 2025). Meanwhile, recent speech gen-eration research has also started to extend toward fuller and richer acoustic scene modeling. For ex-ample, Any2Speech (Song et al., 2026) further in-troduces the modeling of acoustic contexts such as background sounds and environmental ambi-ence, enabling the generated outputs to present more complete acoustic scenes. LLM-based agents have developed rapidly and have been widely applied to solve various com-plex tasks (Yao et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024b; Lian et al., 2025). Recent research has begun to explore using agents to address audio generation tasks. Early works such as AudioGPT (Huang et al., 2023b) utilized large language models (LLMs) as a universal interactive interface to resolve dif-ferent types of audio generation tasks. WavJour-ney (Liu et al., 2025a) leveraged LLMs for compo-sitional audio creation. Meanwhile, a wide range of agent-based methods have been proposed and have achieved great success in tasks such as pod-cast generation, audiobook production, and video dubbing (Rong et al., 2025; Xiao et al., 2025; Rong et al., 2026; Ren et al., 2026). However, these meth-ods often rely on predefined voice or voice library, face challenges in accurately planning timelines for complex audio scene descriptions, and often lack the capability to autonomously perform audio post-processing. Directly generating final audio from complex audio scene descriptions remains a significant chal-lenge. To address this challenge, we propose 

Audio-Oscar , a framework that Orchestrates mul-tiple Specialized agents for Complex Audio scene generation and Refinement. Audio-Oscar trans-forms complex scene descriptions into a structured generation process through role and voice mod-eling, fine-grained timeline planning, and expert model orchestration for different audio types. It further incorporates an audio post-production agent and feedback-driven refinement to improve the naturalness and overall quality of the generated audio. In addition, to address the lack of suit-able benchmarks for evaluating audio generation from complex scene descriptions, we introduce the Audio Scene Generation Bench mark ( ASG-Bench ). ASG-Bench includes audio scene de-scriptions with reference audio as well as text-only scene descriptions. Each scene is annotated with target audio events and temporal statements to eval-uate whether the generated audio faithfully realizes the required scene content and temporal structure. Our experiments show that Audio-Oscar can effec-tively generate audio that reflects complex scene descriptions. Our contributions are as follows: • We propose Audio-Oscar , a multi-agent col-laborative system that uses specialized agents for scene orchestration, audio synthesis, post-production, and mixing to generate audio based solely on complex audio scene text de-scriptions. • We propose ASG-Bench , a benchmark de-signed to evaluate the ability of models and systems to generate extended audio from com-plex audio scene descriptions. • Our experimental results demonstrate that Audio-Oscar can effectively generate com-plex, long-form audio that faithfully follows the given descriptions. 

2 Related Works 

2.1 Audio Generation Models 

Recent advances in TTS, TTA, and TTM have achieved remarkable success. Recent progress in TTS has achieved breakthroughs in zero-shot ex-pressivity, streaming latency, and long-form synthe-sis (Chen et al., 2025; Peng et al., 2025; Du et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2026). TTA models have demon-strated great capabilities in generating high-quality audio that is well aligned with textual prompts, while also improving inference efficiency (Liu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025; Evans et al., 2025; Cheng et al., 2025). Meanwhile, TTM models have shown strong capabilities in generating high-quality music with coherent structures and im-proved controllability over lyrics, instrumentation, and style (Yuan et al., 2026; Gong et al., 2026; Copet et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2025b). However, these specialized models often remain restricted to single task generation. Building on these advances, recent audio-generation architectures have begun to synthesize speech, music, and sound effects within a unified modeling framework (Qiang et al., 2026; AI et al., 2025). However, when applied to more complex audio scenarios, existing models still face challenges in maintaining long-form compositional coherence and modeling persistent yet dynamically evolving environmental sounds. 2To expand modality coverage and interactiv-ity, recent work like Any2Speech (Song et al., 2026) extends speech synthesis toward borderless long-audio generation, using structured seman-tic controls to model acoustic environments and scene-level context. Furthermore, joint video-audio generation has achieved remarkable cross-modal synchronization, enabling the generation of high-quality and complex audio (SII-GAIR et al., 2026; Seedance et al., 2026). Despite this progress, these models are often restricted to generating only short clips, requiring storyboard switching or external techniques for longer durations. Moreover, they produce inherently mixed audio without clear track separation, severely complicating subsequent post-production. 

2.2 Audio Generation Agents 

Driven by the rapid advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs), autonomous agents have experienced exponential development and widespread adoption across numerous fields (Yao et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024b; Lian et al., 2025). In the acoustic domain, this emergence of LLM-based agents has opened a new paradigm for com-positional audio generation by orchestrating foun-dational models for complex tasks (Huang et al., 2023b). Notably, WavJourney (Liu et al., 2025a) pioneered this space by decomposing complex audio scenes into executable scripts, demonstrat-ing that LLMs can logically plan combinations of speech, music, and sound effects. Subsequent multi-agent systems have introduced role-specific collaboration to tackle long-form podcast gener-ation (Xiao et al., 2025), developed a video-to-audio agentic system (Rong et al., 2025), achieved word-level temporal alignment for emotional au-diobooks (Rong et al., 2026) and integrated closed-loop self-reflection mechanisms for interactive au-dio storytelling (Ren et al., 2026). However, existing agentic systems still strug-gle to directly generate audio from complex audio scene descriptions and often lack post-production capabilities for audio refinement. These limitations motivate Audio-Oscar, a multi-agent framework designed to generate complex audio from audio scene descriptions. 

3 Overview 

Audio-Oscar is a multi-agent system for complex audio scene generation. As shown in Figure 2, it decomposes an input scene description into a structured production workflow rather than gener-ating the entire scene in a single pass. The system first normalizes the input, builds speaking role and voice profiles, and generates speech audio at the ut-terance level. The measured speech durations then serve as temporal anchors for drafting and refining a full audio timeline that jointly schedules speech, sound effects, music, and songs. Given the refined timeline, Audio-Oscar routes different audio segments to specialized genera-tion modules, applies critic-guided repair for low-quality sound effects when needed, and augments the timeline with segment-level post-production instructions. The generated segments are finally mixed into a complete scene-level audio output, with a final audit-and-remix step for local post-production refinement. This design enables our sys-tem to effectively generate complex audio scenes. 

4 Method 

In this section, we provide a detailed overview of the generation process in Audio-Oscar. More de-tails about the agents involved in this process are provided in Appendix A. 

4.1 Role Modeling and Voice Design 

Given an input audio scene description x, Audio-Oscar first identifies the speaking roles and con-structs role-level voice profiles. The Speaker Role Profiling Agent extracts the set of speakers 

R = {ri}Mi=1 

from the input description and produces a profile for each speaker: 

vi = Arole (ri, x ),

where vi contains character names, character de-scription, and voice characteristics. These profiles provide speaker-level conditions for downstream speech generation. Audio-Oscar then invokes a voice-design model to synthesize a reference voice for each role: 

ci = Avoice (vi),

where ci denotes the generated reference audio. This stage allows the system to maintain consistent speaker identities across multi-speaker scenes. 3Input and Planning Multi-Agent Decomposition Generation, Review and Mixing 

> Speech
> Song
> Music
> SFX

Leveling 

EQ 

Ducking 

Fade in&out 

> Quality
> Transitions
> Balance
> Alignment
> Input Text
> Rain pattered
> against the
> window while an
> 80s Cantopop
> melody drifted
> from the radio.
> Rickman let out a
> sigh: “How could
> I return to that
> golden age!”
> Then he sang a
> tragic song.

Planner Agents 

> Script Agent
> Voice-Design
> Agent

Audio Plan 

Speech    

> Speech Plan
> Speaker : Rickman
> (Male, Melancholy)
> Voice: Rickman.wav
> Model: CosyVoice3
> Content: “How
> could I return to
> that golden age!”

SFX 

Music 

Song 

Agent 

> (Model & Params)

Plan 

> (What & When)

Executor 

> (Run & Generate)

Sound Effects Plan       

> 00:00:00 – 00:28:20
> Duration: 28.2s
> Volume: -8 dB
> Model: MeanAudio
> Caption: Rain on
> windows repeatedly,
> background white
> noise
> 00:00:00 – 00:08:40
> Duration: 8.4s
> Volume: -12 dB
> Model: Stable Audio
> Caption: Cantopop
> melody, 80s style,
> Synth-pop, String
> padded

Music Plan    

> 00:16:10 – 00:26:40
> Duration: 10.3s
> Volume: -10 dB
> Model: ACE-Step-1.5
> Caption: Cantopop
> melody, 80s style
> Lyrics: zi2 caa1 jat1
> go3 ngaan5 bo1 …

Song Plan 

1 2 3

Generated Segements 

Final Mix 

Review Agent 

Post-processing 

Mixer 

Final 

Mix 

Audio Critic 

Listen 

> Listen closely to individual
> clip to understand the audio
> content.

Evaluate 

> Carefully evaluate the clip
> quality, aesthetics, and
> precise alignment.

Feedback 

> Provide clear, actionable
> feedback and practical
> suggestions for meaningful
> improvements.

Iterate     

> Iteratively refine existing
> plans with bounded retries.
> Agents (Decide & Plan) Plan (Structured Output) Executor (Run & Generate) Audio Output Feedback Loop
> Design unique
> voice for every
> single speaker in
> the script.
> Build the script
> containing all the
> audio events in
> the prompt.
> Timestamp
> Agent

Draft Timeline 

> Apply post-processing skills (fades, ducking,
> reverberation, etc.) on the generated track
> based on the instruction of Audio Post-
> production Planning Agent.

Review & Remix Figure 2: Overview of Audio-Oscar. Given a complex audio scene description, Audio-Oscar decomposes the generation process into multiple coordinated stages, including speaking role extraction and voice design, speech planning and generation, timeline construction and refinement, non-speech audio planning and generation, edit-aware mixing, and feedback-driven refinement. 

4.2 Speech Planning and Generation 

As the actual duration of generated speech is dif-ficult to predict precisely during planning, Audio-Oscar first plans and generates the speech at the utterance level to enable more reliable temporal control. The speech event planning agent extracts explicit dialogue or spoken narration from the input and constructs a set of speech elements 

Esp = {esp 

i }Nsp 

i=1 .

Each speech element is represented as 

esp 

i = ( si, q i, r i)

where si is a stable segment identifier, qi is the ut-terance text, and ri is the speaker. For each speech element, the speech generation planner selects a suitable TTS model and generation parameters ac-cording to the utterance text, speaker, input scene, and model capabilities. The selected TTS model then generates the speech. After synthesis, each speech result is augmented with its generated dura-tion: 

ˆesp 

i = ( si, q i, r i, d i)

where di is the measured duration of the synthe-sized speech. These speech results are later passed to the audio planning stage, which places them on the global timeline by choosing start times and deriving end times. 

4.3 Audio Timeline Planning and Refinement 

Given the generated speech results, Audio-Oscar constructs a full audio timeline that combines speech and non-speech events. Following Rong et al. (2025), we categorize non-speech audio into three types: sound effects (SFX), music, and songs, and define type-specific fields with reference to AudioGenie. The audio timeline drafting agent takes the input scene description and the synthesized speech re-sults ˆEsp = {ˆesp 

i }Nsp 

i=1 as constraints, and produces an initial timeline: 

T (0) = Aaudio (x, ˆEsp ) = {zi}Ni=1 .

Each element zi specifies an audio event in the time-line, including its audio type, start time, end time, duration, and other information such as volume and description. Speech results are treated as protected elements. The agent preserves all content and use their ac-tual durations. It only chooses their start times and the end times are derived from the measured dura-tions. For each speech segment, the planner decides whether forced alignment is needed to construct a more precise timeline. 4After the draft timeline is produced, a timestamp refinement agent repairs and refines the schedule: 

T = Atime (x, T (0) , ˆEsp ).

This stage uses the scene description as the source of narrative intent, the draft timeline as the base plan, and the speech results as trusted constraints. It may add, remove, or correct non-speech events when they are supported by the input scene. The refinement stage improves pacing, pauses, overlaps, and temporal coherence while preserving the rel-ative order of semantically ordered events when required. 

4.4 Non-speech Generation and Post-production Planning 

After timestamp refinement, Audio-Oscar gener-ates the non-speech audio elements specified in the refined timeline. Let 

Ens = T \ ˆEsp 

denote the set of non-speech elements, including sound effects, music, and songs. For each element 

zi, the system constructs an executable generation request. Audio-Oscar employs specialized generation agents for different non-speech audio types. Given a planned non-speech element zi, the correspond-ing agent selects an appropriate generation model and prepares model-specific generation parameters according to its audio type, textual description, tar-get duration, and other information. The selected model then produces the audio 

ˆyi = gi(pi, d i, ρ i),

where pi is the generation prompt or description, 

di is the target duration, and ρi denotes auxiliary generation constraints. Specifically, sound effects are handled by a text-to-audio generation agent, which converts the planned event description and duration requirement into a suitable prompt for a text-to-audio model. Music elements are processed by a music genera-tion agent, which selects a suitable music model and prepares controls for style, mood and dura-tion. Song elements are handled by a song gener-ation agent, which prepares related controls such as lyrical content, vocal style, and accompaniment requirements before invoking the corresponding song generation model. For sound effect generation, Audio-Oscar can further use an audio critic to evaluate generated candidates: 

κi = Acritic (zi, ˆyi),

where κi contains quality, semantic alignment, aes-thetic scores, and suggestions. If a generated clip falls below a predefined threshold, the system uses critic feedback to revise the generation plan by rewriting the prompt, switching to a more suitable TTA model, or adjusting model parameters, and then retries generation for a bounded number of iterations. Before final mixing, Audio-Oscar invokes an audio post-production planning agent to augment the refined timeline with post-production instruc-tions. The agent analyzes the scene intent, tempo-ral layout, and relationships among segments, and adds sparse post-production instructions for indi-vidual segments, such as gain adjustment, volume envelope, compression and reverberation. These instructions are consumed by the mixer to improve balance, transitions, spatial impression, and overall scene coherence. 

4.5 Mixing and Final Editing 

After speech and non-speech generation, Audio-Oscar combines all generated audio segments ac-cording to the timeline to produce a complete scene-level audio output. Audio-Oscar performs a final editing stage after the initial mix. In this stage, the final mix review agent reviews the complete mixed audio in con-junction with the original scene description and the current timeline plan. This stage targets scene-level issues that become apparent only after mixing, such as imbalanced loudness, abrupt transitions, masking between fore-ground and background elements, or insufficient spatial coherence. The final mix review agent pro-poses sparse per-segment remix patches to volume and edit metadata. If valid final edits are produced, Audio-Oscar applies the patches to the audio plan and remixes the audio to obtain a refined final out-put. If no effective edit is needed, the initial mixed audio is kept as the final output. 

5 Experiment 

5.1 ASG-Bench 

The effective evaluation of audio generation from complex audio scene descriptions remains a chal-5Method T2ABench AudioTime Cnt-acc ↑ Ord-acc ↑ TS-acc ↑ Ordering ↓ Duration ↓ Frequency ↓ Timestamp ↑                                                               

> AudioGen (Kreuk et al., 2023) 5.40 6.00 18.40 0.91 3.73 1.58 0.54 AudioLDM (Liu et al., 2023) 4.00 3.40 11.60 0.97 3.41 1.54 0.41 AudioLDM-2 (Liu et al., 2024) 7.40 1.20 13.40 0.96 3.40 1.64 0.54 Tango 2 (Majumder et al., 2024) 4.60 10.20 18.80 0.86 3.70 1.52 0.61 Make-An-Audio2 (Huang et al., 2023a) 4.00 19.80 18.80 0.76 3.40 1.42 0.56 Stable Audio Open (Evans et al., 2025) 9.80 6.00 21.80 0.98 3.07 1.46 0.53 MMAudio (Cheng et al., 2025) 4.80 2.40 21.40 0.98 3.33 1.54 0.50 AudioX (Tian et al., 2026) 12.40 23.60 28.20 0.34 1.30 0.74 0.81
> Audio-Oscar 22.60 69.80 20.20 0.79 1.44 1.08 0.54

Table 1: Evaluation of instruction-following T2A ability on T2ABench and AudioTime. Except for our Audio-Oscar, all reported results are from AudioX (Tian et al., 2026).                                                                                                        

> Method LLM Thinking Event (%) ↑Temporal (%) ↑LALM-based Score Quality ↑Alignment ↑Aesthetic ↑
> Paired Reference Audio ––93.62 95.26 4.25 4.54 4.26 Any2Speech ––80.38 84.54 4.17 3.82 3.78 WavJourney DeepSeek-V4-Flash ✗87.26 92.09 3.84 3.90 3.57 Audio-Oscar DeepSeek-V4-Flash ✗92.14 93.36 4.13 4.23 3.96 Audio-Oscar DeepSeek-V4-Flash ✓92.04 93.78 4.03 4.20 3.88 Audio-Oscar Qwen-122B-A10B ✗90.25 93.56 4.18 4.31 4.01
> Audio-Oscar Qwen-397B-A17B ✗91.31 93.72 4.11 4.20 3.95 Text Any2Speech ––51.65 41.16 3.53 2.63 2.74 WavJourney DeepSeek-V4-Flash ✗72.33 76.13 3.66 3.50 3.28 Audio-Oscar DeepSeek-V4-Flash ✗84.34 82.92 4.06 4.12 3.93
> Audio-Oscar DeepSeek-V4-Flash ✓81.94 81.48 3.49 3.74 3.36 Audio-Oscar Qwen-122B-A10B ✗79.98 79.51 4.04 4.12 3.93
> Audio-Oscar Qwen-397B-A17B ✗83.80 81.79 3.95 4.11 3.86

Table 2: Evaluation of event fidelity, temporal consistency, and LALM-based audio score on ASG-Bench. LLM denotes the large language model used as the backbone of each method. The best results are highlighted in bold, and the second-best results are underlined. 

lenging problem, mainly due to the lack of bench-mark datasets and the inherent difficulty of assess-ing generation quality. Based on this, we propose ASG-Bench, as illustrated in Figure 3. The dataset is composed of two parts: a reference-audio sub-set, where audio scene descriptions are paired with reference audio recordings, and a text-only subset, which contains audio scene descriptions without reference audio. Specifically, the reference-audio subset is constructed based on Omni-Cloze (Ma et al., 2026). In addition, each description is anno-tated with the expected audio events and temporal assertions, which are used for the preliminary eval-uation of the quality of the generated audio. More details about this benchmark can be found in Ap-pendix C. 

5.2 Experimental Setup Implementation Details In our experiments, we select a set of open-source models. Specifically, for the LLM-based agents, we use DeepSeek-V4-Flash (DeepSeek-AI, 2026), Qwen3.5-122B-A10B, and Qwen3.5-397B-A17B (Qwen Team, 2026). For the critic model, we employ a quantized ver-sion of Qwen3-Omni-30B-A3B-Instruct (Xu et al., 2025). For voice design, we use Qwen3-TTS-12Hz-1.7B-VoiceDesign (Hu et al., 2026). For text-to-speech synthesis, we use VoxCPM2 (Team, 2026b; Zhou et al., 2025) and CosyVoice 3 (Du et al., 2025); for text-to-audio generation, we adopt MMAudio (Cheng et al., 2025) and Stable Au-dio Open (Evans et al., 2025). For song gener-ation, we use ACE-Step v1.5 with its 1.7B LM planner (Gong et al., 2026). In addition, we em-ploy Qwen3-ForcedAligner-0.6B (Shi et al., 2026) for precise timestamp alignment, and further use Demucs for vocal source separation in generated songs (Rouard et al., 2023; Défossez, 2021). Ex-cept for the LLM-based agents accessed via offi-cial APIs, all the above models are deployed lo-cally on RTX 4090 GPUs. In particular, Qwen3-TTS-VoiceDesign and VoxCPM2 are served using vLLM-Omni (Yin et al., 2026). During inference, the temperature of all LLMs is set to 0.1. More details are provided in Appendix B 

Benchmark and Metrics For text-to-audio eval-uation, we focus on its instruction-following capa-6Figure 3: Overview of ASG-Bench, a benchmark for evaluating audio generation from complex audio scene descriptions. Each sample is annotated with expected audio events and temporal statements, supporting the as-sessment of whether generated audio faithfully captures both the scene content and temporal structure described in the prompt. 

bility. We therefore evaluate Audio-Oscar on T2A-bench (Tian et al., 2026) and AudioTime (Xie et al., 2025). These benchmarks focus on fine-grained controllability, including event counting, ordering, duration, frequency, and timestamp-related con-straints. We follow the evaluation protocol used in AudioX and compare Audio-Oscar with the re-ported baseline results (Tian et al., 2026). To assess Audio-Oscar’s ability to generate long-form audio that faithfully reflects complex audio scene descriptions, we evaluate it on ASG-Bench. We use Qwen3.5-Omni-Plus as the audio under-standing evaluator (Team, 2026a). Specifically, we first examine whether the audio events in each de-scription are present in the generated audio, and whether the temporal statements are satisfied. We report the coverage rates of these events and tem-poral statements to measure event coverage and temporal consistency. In addition, we adopt a 1-5 rating scale and ask the evaluator to score each generated audio sample along three dimensions: au-dio quality for fidelity and listening clarity, scene alignment for consistency with the target descrip-tion, and aesthetic appeal for overall naturalness and artistic quality. Detailed evaluation prompts and implementation details are provided in Ap-pendix C. 

5.3 Main Results Instruction-following text-to-audio generation 

Table 1 reports the results on T2A-Bench and Audi-oTime. To ensure consistency across experiments, we use Stable Audio Open as the only TTA genera-tion model. On T2A-Bench, Audio-Oscar achieves the best Cnt-acc and Ord-acc, showing the ben-efit of explicit scene planning for compositional event organization. It also obtains near-perfect cat-egory accuracy, since event categories are explicitly parsed and routed during planning; we therefore focus the main table on counting, ordering, and timestamp metrics. However, its TS-acc remains below AudioX, indicating that precise timestamp control is still limited by the underlying T2A gen-erator. On AudioTime, Audio-Oscar obtains com-petitive results on duration and frequency metrics. This suggests that planning-based decomposition helps with temporal attributes such as duration and repetition. Nevertheless, it still lags behind AudioX on ordering and timestamp metrics, showing that fine-grained temporal grounding remains a limita-tion. Moreover, compared with the original results of Stable Audio Open on both benchmarks, our method achieves clear improvements, further show-ing the effectiveness of our system. 

Complex Audio Scene Generation Table 2 re-ports the results on ASG-Bench. We compare Audio-Oscar with WavJourney (Liu et al., 2025a) and Any2Speech (Song et al., 2026). For WavJour-ney, we use DeepSeek-V4-Flash in non-reasoning mode. More experimental details can be found in Appendix B. We further present the performance of Audio-Oscar when different LLMs are used as the agent. As shown by the experimental results, Audio-Oscar achieves great performance on ASG-Bench when using different LLMs. For the sub-set with reference audio, Audio-Oscar achieves audio-event and temporal-statement scores that are close to those of the reference audio across mul-tiple LLM settings, demonstrating its ability to faithfully capture target scene events and preserve temporal structure. Meanwhile, Audio-Oscar also achieves higher LALM-based scores than the base-line systems, approaching the quality of reference 7Overall Quality Alignment Aesthetic                      

> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Score  3.36 3.52 3.33 3.24
> 3.70 3.62 3.69 3.37
> 4.18 3.96 4.25
> 3.83
> Pair
> Overall Quality Alignment Aesthetic
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Score  2.99 3.11 2.97 2.82
> 3.38 3.31 3.37
> 2.95
> 3.94 3.88 4.00 3.71
> Text
> Any2Speech WavJourney Audio-Oscar (Ours)

Figure 4: Human Subjective Evaluation Scores for Sam-pled Examples from ASG-Bench. WavJourney and our method are evaluated using DeepSeek-V4-Flash with reasoning mode disabled. 

audio. On the more challenging text-only subset, Audio-Oscar also achieves strong results across different LLM backbones and clearly outperforms the compared methods. We also observe that en-abling the thinking mode for DeepSeek does not improve performance. This may suggest that dis-abling the thinking mode can reduce inference cost while maintaining competitive performance in our pipeline. 

Human Evaluation We conduct a human eval-uation to assess the quality of the audio generated by our method. Specifically, we perform a sub-jective listening study using mean opinion scores (MOS). Human listeners evaluate each audio sam-ple along three dimensions: Quality, Alignment, and Aesthetic. They are asked to provide an overall score for each generated audio sample. We ran-domly sample 10 examples from each subset of ASG-Bench, resulting in a total of 20 audio sam-ples for human evaluation. We collect scores from 10 participants, with each participant asked to rate the samples on a 1–5 scale. More details are pro-vided in Appendix B.5. As shown in Figure 4, our method also achieves strong performance in the subjective evaluation. Compared with other meth-ods, our method obtains clearly higher subjective scores, demonstrating its ability to generate audio scenes that better align with human subjective pref-erences. 0 60 120 180 240 300 360 

> Average generation time (s/sample)
> WavJourney
> DeepSeek
> Audio-Oscar
> Qwen-122B
> Audio-Oscar
> DeepSeek
> Audio-Oscar
> Qwen-397B
> Audio-Oscar
> DeepSeek
> Thinking
> 95.62
> 156.40
> 179.90
> 252.30
> 329.90
> WavJourney
> Audio-Oscar

Figure 5: Average generation time of WavJourney and Audio-Oscar on randomly sampled ASG-Bench exam-ples. DeepSeek refers to DeepSeek-V4-Flash. Unless otherwise specified, all LLMs are used in non-thinking mode. 

Runtime Analysis We further evaluate the run-time of Audio-Oscar by randomly sampling 10 examples from ASG-Bench and measuring the av-erage generation time under different LLMs. As shown in Figure 5, Audio-Oscar requires 156.40– 329.90 seconds per sample depending on different LLMs, whereas WavJourney requires 95.62 sec-onds per sample. The additional runtime is ex-pected as Audio-Oscar performs role modeling and voice design, timeline refinement, critic-guided re-pair and post-production planning. Since runtime depends on scene complexity, the generated time-line structure, API latency, and generation models, these results are intended only as a reference. 

6 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduce Audio-Oscar, a multi-agent system designed for complex audio scene generation. Starting from an audio scene descrip-tion, Audio-Oscar decomposes generation into a structured production workflow, including role modeling and voice design, event and timeline planning, timeline scheduling, model orchestration, and audio post-production. By integrating struc-tured planning, model orchestration and audio post-production into a unified pipeline, Audio-Oscar is able to handle audio scenes involving dialogue, en-vironmental sounds, music, songs, and complex temporal relationships. We also introduce ASG-Bench. The benchmark is designed around com-plex audio scene descriptions and aims to assess whether a model or system can accurately under-stand and generate final audio that is consistent with the input description. Our experimental re-sults show that Audio-Oscar can effectively gener-ate complex audio scenes. 8Limitations 

Audio-Oscar uses a Voice-Design TTS model in its pipeline to create and assign customized voices for different characters, improving consistency and controllability in multi-character speech genera-tion. However, compared with real recorded human voices, these generated voices may still be limited in authenticity, naturalness, and subtle emotional expressiveness. In addition, when handling especially long audio requests, the planning stage of Audio-Oscar may sometimes arrange the content as a single long gen-eration segment. Such a segment can exceed the stable capability range of the underlying generation model, which may affect temporal alignment and overall audio quality. For certain transient or ex-treme audio events, such as door slams, impacts, or explosions, the planner may also assign an overly short duration. If the duration is too short, the generation model may struggle to capture the full attack, body, and decay of the sound, resulting in audio that is less clear or realistic. Finally, for the evaluation phase, our benchmark relies on large models for rubric-based scoring. Thus, the reliability of our evaluation is currently bounded by the capabilities of the evaluator mod-els, though its effectiveness will steadily scale and improve alongside future advancements in audio foundation models. 

Ethics Statement 

This work aims to generate long-form audio that better aligns with users’ scenario descriptions by leveraging multi-agent collaboration to au-tonomously plan the audio generation pipeline, in-cluding timeline arrangement, the selection and invocation of different open-source models, and necessary audio post-production. We currently use open-source models and encourage users to care-fully consider potential copyright issues when us-ing the system. Given the risk of misuse, users are expected to ensure that both their input content and the generated outputs comply with applicable norms and ethical standards. 

References 

Inclusion AI, Biao Gong, Cheng Zou, Chuanyang Zheng, Chunluan Zhou, Canxiang Yan, Chunxiang Jin, Chunjie Shen, Dandan Zheng, Fudong Wang, Furong Xu, GuangMing Yao, Jun Zhou, Jingdong Chen, Jianxin Sun, Jiajia Liu, Jianjiang Zhu, Jun Peng, Kaixiang Ji, and 39 others. 2025. Ming-omni: A unified multimodal model for perception and gen-eration. Preprint , arXiv:2506.09344. Max Bain, Jaesung Huh, Tengda Han, and Andrew Zis-serman. 2023. Whisperx: Time-accurate speech transcription of long-form audio. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00747 .Yushen Chen, Zhikang Niu, Ziyang Ma, Keqi Deng, Chunhui Wang, JianZhao JianZhao, Kai Yu, and Xie Chen. 2025. F5-tts: A fairytaler that fakes fluent and faithful speech with flow matching. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 6255–6271. Ho Kei Cheng, Masato Ishii, Akio Hayakawa, Takashi Shibuya, Alexander Schwing, and Yuki Mitsufuji. 2025. Mmaudio: Taming multimodal joint training for high-quality video-to-audio synthesis. In Pro-ceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition Conference , pages 28901–28911. Jade Copet, Felix Kreuk, Itai Gat, Tal Remez, David Kant, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and Alexandre Défossez. 2023. Simple and controllable music gen-eration. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:47704–47720. DeepSeek-AI. 2026. Deepseek-v4: Towards highly efficient million-token context intelligence. Alexandre Défossez. 2021. Hybrid spectrogram and waveform source separation. In Proceedings of the ISMIR 2021 Workshop on Music Source Separation .Zhihao Du, Changfeng Gao, Yuxuan Wang, Fan Yu, Tianyu Zhao, Hao Wang, Xiang Lv, Hui Wang, Chongjia Ni, Xian Shi, Keyu An, Guanrou Yang, Yabin Li, Yanni Chen, Zhifu Gao, Qian Chen, Yue Gu, Mengzhe Chen, Yafeng Chen, and 3 others. 2025. Cosyvoice 3: Towards in-the-wild speech gen-eration via scaling-up and post-training. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.17589. Zach Evans, Julian D Parker, CJ Carr, Zack Zukowski, Josiah Taylor, and Jordi Pons. 2025. Stable audio open. In ICASSP 2025-2025 IEEE International Con-ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 1–5. IEEE. Junmin Gong, Yulin Song, Wenxiao Zhao, Sen Wang, Shengyuan Xu, Jing Guo, and Xuerui Yang. 2026. Ace-step 1.5: Pushing the boundaries of open-source music generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.00744 .Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Abdel-rahman Mohamed. 2021. Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked prediction of hidden units. IEEE/ACM transactions on audio, speech, and language processing , 29:3451–3460. 

9Hangrui Hu, Xinfa Zhu, Ting He, Dake Guo, Bin Zhang, Xiong Wang, Zhifang Guo, Ziyue Jiang, Hongkun Hao, Zishan Guo, Xinyu Zhang, Pei Zhang, Baosong Yang, Jin Xu, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. 2026. Qwen3-tts technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.15621. Jiawei Huang, Yi Ren, Rongjie Huang, Dongchao Yang, Zhenhui Ye, Chen Zhang, Jinglin Liu, Xiang Yin, Zejun Ma, and Zhou Zhao. 2023a. Make-an-audio 2: Temporal-enhanced text-to-audio genera-tion. Preprint , arXiv:2305.18474. Rongjie Huang, Mingze Li, Dongchao Yang, Jia-tong Shi, Xuankai Chang, Zhenhui Ye, Yuning Wu, Zhiqing Hong, Jiawei Huang, Jinglin Liu, Yi Ren, Zhou Zhao, and Shinji Watanabe. 2023b. Audiogpt: Understanding and generating speech, music, sound, and talking head. Preprint , arXiv:2304.12995. Felix Kreuk, Gabriel Synnaeve, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Devi Parikh, Yaniv Taigman, and Yossi Adi. 2023. Audio-gen: Textually guided audio generation. Preprint ,arXiv:2209.15352. Xiquan Li, Junxi Liu, Yuzhe Liang, Zhikang Niu, Wenxi Chen, and Xie Chen. 2025. Meanaudio: Fast and faithful text-to-audio generation with mean flows. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06098 .Niu Lian, Yuting Wang, Hanshu Yao, Jinpeng Wang, Bin Chen, Yaowei Wang, Min Zhang, and Shu-Tao Xia. 2025. From verbatim to gist: Distilling pyrami-dal multimodal memory via semantic information bottleneck for long-horizon video agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.01455 .Haohe Liu, Zehua Chen, Yi Yuan, Xinhao Mei, Xubo Liu, Danilo Mandic, Wenwu Wang, and Mark D Plumbley. 2023. AudioLDM: Text-to-audio gener-ation with latent diffusion models. Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning ,pages 21450–21474. Haohe Liu, Yi Yuan, Xubo Liu, Xinhao Mei, Qiuqiang Kong, Qiao Tian, Yuping Wang, Wenwu Wang, Yux-uan Wang, and Mark D Plumbley. 2024. Audi-oldm 2: Learning holistic audio generation with self-supervised pretraining. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , 32:2871– 2883. Xubo Liu, Zhongkai Zhu, Haohe Liu, Yi Yuan, Qiushi Huang, Meng Cui, Jinhua Liang, Yin Cao, Qiuqiang Kong, Mark D. Plumbley, and Wenwu Wang. 2025a. Wavjourney: Compositional audio creation with large language models. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing , 33:2830–2844. Zihan Liu, Shuangrui Ding, Zhixiong Zhang, Xiaoyi Dong, Pan Zhang, Yuhang Zang, Yuhang Cao, Dahua Lin, and Jiaqi Wang. 2025b. Songgen: A single stage auto-regressive transformer for text-to-song genera-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13128 .Ziyang Ma, Ruiyang Xu, Zhenghao Xing, Yunfei Chu, Yuxuan Wang, Jinzheng He, Jin Xu, Pheng-Ann Heng, Kai Yu, Junyang Lin, Eng Siong Chng, and Xie Chen. 2026. Omni-captioner: Data pipeline, models, and benchmark for omni detailed percep-tion. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Navonil Majumder, Chia-Yu Hung, Deepanway Ghosal, Wei-Ning Hsu, Rada Mihalcea, and Soujanya Poria. 2024. Tango 2: Aligning diffusion-based text-to-audio generations through direct preference optimiza-tion. Preprint , arXiv:2404.09956. OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Alt-man, Shyamal Anadkat, Red Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haim-ing Bao, Mohammad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, and 262 others. 2024. Gpt-4 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2303.08774. Zhiliang Peng, Jianwei Yu, Wenhui Wang, Yaoyao Chang, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yi Zhu, Weijiang Xu, Hangbo Bao, Zehua Wang, Shaohan Huang, Yan Xia, and Furu Wei. 2025. Vibevoice technical report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2508.19205. Chunyu Qiang, Xiaopeng Wang, Kang Yin, Yuzhe Liang, Yuxin Guo, Teng Ma, Ziyu Zhang, Tian-rui Wang, Cheng Gong, Yushen Chen, Ruibo Fu, Chen Zhang, Longbiao Wang, and Jianwu Dang. 2026. Unisonate: A unified model for speech, music, and sound effect generation with text instructions. 

Preprint , arXiv:2604.22209. Qwen Team. 2026. Qwen3.5: Towards native multi-modal agents. Yiming Ren, Xuenan Xu, Ziyang Zhang, Wen Wu, Baoxiang Li, and Chao Zhang. 2026. Audirector: A self-reflective closed-loop framework for immer-sive audio storytelling. Preprint , arXiv:2605.11866. Yan Rong, Jinting Wang, Guangzhi Lei, Shan Yang, and Li Liu. 2025. Audiogenie: A training-free multi-agent framework for diverse multimodality-to-multiaudio generation. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pages 8872–8881. Yan Rong, Shan Yang, Chenxing Li, Dong Yu, and Li Liu. 2026. Dopamine audiobook: A training-free mllm agent for emotional and immersive audiobook generation. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing .Simon Rouard, Francisco Massa, and Alexandre Dé-fossez. 2023. Hybrid transformers for music source separation. In ICASSP 23 .Team Seedance, De Chen, Liyang Chen, Xin Chen, Ying Chen, Zhuo Chen, Zhuowei Chen, Feng Cheng, Tianheng Cheng, Yufeng Cheng, Mojie Chi, Xuyan Chi, Jian Cong, Qinpeng Cui, Fei Ding, Qide 

10 Dong, Yujiao Du, Haojie Duanmu, Junliang Fan, and 152 others. 2026. Seedance 2.0: Advancing video generation for world complexity. Preprint ,arXiv:2604.14148. Xian Shi, Xiong Wang, Zhifang Guo, Yongqi Wang, Pei Zhang, Xinyu Zhang, Zishan Guo, Hongkun Hao, Yu Xi, Baosong Yang, Jin Xu, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. 2026. Qwen3-asr technical report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2601.21337. SII-GAIR, Sand. ai, :, Ethan Chern, Hansi Teng, Han-wen Sun, Hao Wang, Hong Pan, Hongyu Jia, Jiadi Su, Jin Li, Junjie Yu, Lijie Liu, Lingzhi Li, Lyumanshan Ye, Min Hu, Qiangang Wang, Quanwei Qi, Steffi Chern, and 27 others. 2026. Speed by simplicity: A single-stream architecture for fast audio-video gener-ative foundation model. Preprint , arXiv:2603.21986. Xingchen Song, Di Wu, Dinghao Zhou, Pengyu Cheng, Hongwu Ding, Yunchao He, Jie Wang, Shengfan Shen, Sixiang Lv, Lichun Fan, Hang Su, Yifeng Wang, Shuai Wang, Meng Meng, and Jian Luan. 2026. Borderless long speech synthesis. Preprint ,arXiv:2603.19798. Suno. 2023. Bark. https://github.com/suno-ai/ bark .Qwen Team. 2026a. Qwen3.5-omni technical report. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.15804 .VoxCPM Team. 2026b. Voxcpm2: Tokenizer-free tts for multilingual speech generation, creative voice design, and true-to-life cloning. GitHub .Zeyue Tian, Zhaoyang Liu, Yizhu Jin, Ruibin Yuan, Liumeng Xue, Xu Tan, Qifeng Chen, Wei Xue, and Yike Guo. 2026. Audiox: A unified framework for anything-to-audio generation. In The Fourteenth In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations .Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Matthew Le, Andros Tjandra, Yi-Chiao Wu, Baishan Guo, Jiemin Zhang, Xinyue Zhang, Robert Adkins, William Ngan, Jeff Wang, Ivan Cruz, Bapi Akula, Akinniyi Akinyemi, Brian Ellis, Rashel Moritz, Yael Yungster, Alice Rakotoari-son, Liang Tan, and 5 others. 2023. Audiobox: Uni-fied audio generation with natural language prompts. 

Preprint , arXiv:2312.15821. Yujia Xiao, Lei He, Haohan Guo, Feng-Long Xie, and Tan Lee. 2025. Podagent: A comprehensive frame-work for podcast generation. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 ,pages 23923–23937. Zeyu Xie, Xuenan Xu, Zhizheng Wu, and Mengyue Wu. 2025. Audiotime: A temporally-aligned audio-text benchmark dataset. In ICASSP 2025-2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 1–5. IEEE. Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Hangrui Hu, Yunfei Chu, Xiong Wang, Jinzheng He, Yuxuan Wang, Xian Shi, Ting He, Xinfa Zhu, Yuanjun Lv, Yongqi Wang, Dake Guo, He Wang, Linhan Ma, Pei Zhang, Xinyu Zhang, Hongkun Hao, Zishan Guo, and 19 oth-ers. 2025. Qwen3-omni technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2509.17765. Dongchao Yang, Jinchuan Tian, Xu Tan, Rongjie Huang, Songxiang Liu, Xuankai Chang, Jiatong Shi, Sheng Zhao, Jiang Bian, Zhou Zhao, Xixin Wu, and He-len Meng. 2024a. Uniaudio: An audio foundation model toward universal audio generation. Preprint ,arXiv:2310.00704. John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024b. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:50528– 50652. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Peiqi Yin, Jiangyun Zhu, Han Gao, Chenguang Zheng, Yongxiang Huang, Taichang Zhou, Ruirui Yang, Weizhi Liu, Weiqing Chen, Canlin Guo, Didan Deng, Zifeng Mo, Cong Wang, James Cheng, Roger Wang, and Hongsheng Liu. 2026. vllm-omni: Fully disag-gregated serving for any-to-any multimodal models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2602.02204. Ruibin Yuan, Hanfeng Lin, Shuyue Guo, Ge Zhang, Jiahao Pan, Yongyi Zang, Haohe Liu, Yiming Liang, Wenye Ma, Xingjian Du, Xeron Du, Zhen Ye, Tianyu Zheng, Zhengxuan Jiang, Yinghao Ma, Minghao Liu, Zeyue Tian, Ziya Zhou, Liumeng Xue, and 39 oth-ers. 2026. Yue: Scaling open foundation models for long-form music generation. In The Fourteenth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations .Yixuan Zhou, Guoyang Zeng, Xin Liu, Xiang Li, Renjie Yu, Ziyang Wang, Runchuan Ye, Weiyue Sun, Jiancheng Gui, Kehan Li, Zhiyong Wu, and Zhiyuan Liu. 2025. Voxcpm: Tokenizer-free tts for context-aware speech generation and true-to-life voice cloning. Preprint , arXiv:2509.24650. 

A Audio-Oscar 

In Audio-Oscar’s pipeline, following prior related work (Liu et al., 2025a; Rong et al., 2025), we consistently employ structured JSON as the out-put format and use it to pass information across different stages of the system. 

A.1 Agents in Audio-Oscar Scene Intake Agent The Scene Intake Agent is an optional module that converts user input into a canonical scene description for downstream au-dio planning. The agent supports two modes. In 11 script mode, it conservatively normalizes an exist-ing audio description by improving punctuation, paragraphing, sentence flow, and clarity, while strictly preserving the original language as well as all explicitly stated sound events, dialog and constraints. No deletion, modification, or addition is allowed. In idea mode, the agent expands a brief user idea into a fuller audio scene description by making only reasonable and scene-consistent elabo-rations, thereby providing downstream agents with a generation-ready description. In our evaluation, we use only the script mode, while the idea mode is included solely as an extended functionality. 

Speaker Role Profiling Agent The Speaker Role Profiling Agent extracts speaking roles from the scene description and constructs role profiles. For each detected role, the agent outputs a role identi-fier, a role description, a stable voice description, and a short sentence for zero-shot voice reference. For voice descriptions, we require the model to focus primarily on stable acoustic attributes such as gender, age, pitch, speaking rate, articulation clarity, and accent, while avoiding scene-specific emotions or utterance-level performance variations. These role profiles provide the basis for speaker identity modeling and voice design in subsequent TTS generation. 

Speech Event Planning Agent The Speech Event Planning Agent generates a complete speech plan required for subsequent TTS generation based on the scene description and the extracted speaker profiles. It is responsible for identifying all speech events in the input and assigning each utterance to its corresponding speaking role. The agent is con-strained to preserve the original dialogue and is not allowed to create new dialogue or rewrite existing utterances. The final output is a structured list of speech segments, where each segment contains the speaker name and the exact text to be synthesized. 

Audio Timeline Planning Agents First, the Au-dio Timeline Drafting Agent determines which non-speech events are needed in the scene and assigns each segment an audio type, acoustic description, start time, duration, and initial volume. It also ar-ranges non-speech sounds around the generated speech segments. Speech segments are treated as fixed events, their speaker names, text, and dura-tions are preserved, and the agent is only respon-sible for scheduling their start time and end time. In addition, the agent marks speech segments that require forced alignment when necessary, so that finer-grained word-level timing information can be obtained in cases involving nearby detailed sound effects, interruptions, or overlapping events. The Timestamp Refinement Agent then repairs and re-fines the draft timeline. It takes the scene descrip-tion, the draft timeline, trusted speech durations, and available forced-alignment information as in-put, and improves pacing, pauses, overlaps, back-grounds, and temporal coherence. The agent may only add, remove, or correct non-speech events supported by the scene description, while ensuring that every speech segment is fully preserved and ap-pears exactly once. The final output is a complete audio timeline. 

Non-speech Generation Planning Agents The agents convert the audio timeline into executable generation plans for different types of non-speech audio. Follow Rong et al. (2025), Audio-Oscar as-signs expert agents to sound effects, music, and songs, respectively, with each agent processing only the segments of the corresponding type in the timeline. The TTA Generation Planning Agent is responsible for sound effects. For each segment, it selects an appropriate TTA model and generation parameters, and reformulates the segment descrip-tion into a suitable generation prompt to the model. When critic feedback is available, this agent can also repair generation results with low scores by modifying the prompt, switching models, or ad-justing parameters, but it is not allowed to alter the timeline or the semantic meaning of the events. The Music Generation Planning Agent handles non-lyrical music segments, such as background music. It selects suitable models and parameters for each music segment and converts the segment into a complete, generatable music description. Mean-while, it preserves all timeline-related information. The Song Generation Planning Agent is responsi-ble for song segments that require singing or lyrical content. For each song segment, it selects an appro-priate song generation model and parameters, and produces the style tags, lyrics, or singing descrip-tions required by the song generation model. Like the other generation planning agents, it strictly pre-serves the timeline and only completes the model inputs required for song generation. 

Audio Critic and TTA Repair Agent The Au-dio Critic and the TTA Repair Agent provides feedback-driven quality control and iterative re-finement for generated sound effects. Given a 12 planned audio event and its generated audio clip, the Audio Critic listens to the clip and scores it from 0 to 1 along three dimensions: quality, which measures audio fidelity, clarity, naturalness; align-ment, which measures whether the generated audio matches the target audio description; and aesthet-ics, which measures the usability and pleasantness of the clip. If any score falls below a predefined threshold, the critic returns revision suggestions. The TTA Repair Planner then uses this feedback to revise low-scoring generation plans by rewriting the generation prompt, switching to a more suit-able TTA model, or adjusting model parameters. This enables iterative improvement of low-quality or semantically misaligned sound effects. 

Audio Post-production Planning Agent Audio-Oscar invokes an Audio Post-production Planning Agent to supplement the refined audio timeline with segment-level editing instructions. This agent analyzes the scene, temporal layout, and relation-ships among segments, and attaches sparse post-production metadata to individual segments. Cur-rently, The supported operations include gain ad-justment, fade-in and fade-out, crossfade, volume envelope, ducking, panning, equalization, compres-sion, and reverberation. This agent only specifies how each generated segment should be shaped in the final mix. 

Final Mix Review Agent After the initial mix is generated, Audio-Oscar can invoke a Final Mix Audit Agent to perform an additional review pass. This agent is based on an audio-capable omni model. It listens to the complete mixed audio and compares it with both the planned scene in-tent and the actual mixer manifest. The agent receives segment-level context that includes the original plan and the mixer-applied results, and identifies only actionable mix-level issues, such as abrupt boundaries, inappropriate dryness or re-verberation, and poor loudness balance. It outputs sparse per-segment remix patches only for existing segments. The allowed updates are limited to vol-ume adjustments and post-production edit fields. The mixer then applies these patches to produce an optimized final audio output, improving the bal-ance, transitions, and overall coherence of the final mix. 

B Experiments 

B.1 Implementations Configuration 

When evaluating T2ABench and AudioTime, we skip the Scene Intake Agent to ensure consis-tency across inputs. In contrast, for ASG-Bench, we retain the use of the Scene Intake Agent. During evaluation on ASG-Bench, we use the following models: for voice design, we select Qwen3-TTS-12Hz-1.7B-VoiceDesign (Hu et al., 2026). For sound effects generation, we use MMAudio with the large_44k_v2 vari-ant (Cheng et al., 2025) and Stable Audio Open with the stabilityai/stable-audio-open-1.0 

checkpoint (Evans et al., 2025), both using their official default inference parameters. For music generation, considering that the required audio is primarily background or instrumental music, we use the same Stable Audio Open checkpoint as be-fore (Evans et al., 2025). For song generation, we use ACE-Step v1.5 with its 1.7B LM model for planning and base DiT model for execution (Gong et al., 2026). In addition, we continue to use Qwen3-ForcedAligner-0.6B (Shi et al., 2026), De-mucs (Rouard et al., 2023; Défossez, 2021) and Qwen3-Omni-30B-A3B-Instruct-AWQ-4bit (Xu et al., 2025). For the use of Demucs, we intro-duce an additional parameter, pure_vocal , into the model-selection parameters of ACE-Step for Song Generation Planning Agent. When this parameter is set to true by the agent, the generated song is au-tomatically routed to Demucs for post-processing, where the vocal stem is separated from the accom-paniment to obtain a vocal-only output. For critic-guided TTA repair, we set the repair threshold to 0.7 and allow at most three repair retries. When evaluating T2ABench and AudioTime, we use only Stable Audio Open (Evans et al., 2025) for sound effects generation to ensure comparability. Meanwhile, we keep all other pipelines and models unchanged, so as to evaluate the performance of our system under realistic deployment settings. 

B.2 Details of Any2Speech Evaluation 

To the best of our knowledge, Any2Speech (Song et al., 2026) did not provide a public API at the time our experiments were conducted. We there-fore evaluated it through its publicly available web interface. Any2Speech provides a scene-setting option in its interface. To make the comparison fair and to prevent the system from directly reading environmental descriptions as audiobook-style nar-13 ration, we prepend a short task instruction to each benchmark prompt: " Generate vivid scenes, not an audiobook. " The original scene description from ASG-Bench is then appended after this instruction. We collect the generated audio outputs for all 601 examples in ASG-Bench. This protocol allows us to compare the final au-dio quality and the instruction-following ability of Any2Speech with other systems. However, it does not provide a reliable measurement of gen-eration latency. Since Any2Speech is accessed through a web interface rather than a controllable local or programmatic API, the observed runtime may include request scheduling, server-side avail-ability, network transmission, and interface-related overhead. These factors are not directly compara-ble with the controlled execution time of Audio-Oscar and WavJourney. Therefore, we exclude Any2Speech from the time consumption compari-son. 

B.3 Details of WavJourney Evaluation 

While WavJourney (Liu et al., 2025a) provides a comprehensive open-source framework for evalu-ation, we introduced several modifications to the original pipeline to ensure fairness and architec-tural consistency during benchmarking. First, we upgraded the foundational models to align with modern baselines. For TTS, the origi-nal HuBERT-Bark (Hsu et al., 2021; Suno, 2023) pipeline was replaced with CosyVoice3 to enable direct reference audio input and superior synthesis quality. For TTA and TTM, we consolidated the separate AudioGen (Kreuk et al., 2023) and Music-Gen (Copet et al., 2023) components into Stable Audio Open. Furthermore, the central LLM for planning was switched from GPT-4 (OpenAI et al., 2024) to DeepSeek-V4-Flash in non-reasoning mode. Second, we adapted the voice timbre matching logic. Since WavJourney requires reference audio for speech synthesis, we utilized the audio gener-ated during the voice design phase of our Audio-Oscar framework as the reference timbre library. Because both frameworks employ LLMs for dy-namic persona planning, discrepancies often arise in character counts and naming conventions. To resolve this, we implemented an LLM-based se-mantic alignment mechanism that performs match-ings between WavJourney’s planned target charac-ters and our timbre library, guaranteeing consistent voice assignment for every role. To ensure a fair comparison, the timbre library for each setting is also generated by our framework using DeepSeek-V4-Flash in non-reasoning mode, matching the planning LLM configuration used in the adapted WavJourney pipeline. Additionally, we resolved several operational anomalies in the original pipeline, such as lan-guage mismatches and invalid planning parame-ters. These issues were mitigated through prompt optimization and runtime dynamic validation. Ul-timately, we successfully evaluated the modified WavJourney framework on 601 samples from the ASG-Bench dataset, collecting both the generated audio and their corresponding time consumption metrics for empirical comparison. 

B.4 Instruction-Following Text-to-Audio Benchmarks 

To further evaluate the instruction-following ability of Audio-Oscar for controllable text-to-audio gen-eration, we conduct additional experiments on T2A-bench (Tian et al., 2026) and AudioTime (Xie et al., 2025). T2A-bench is designed to evaluate fine-grained text-to-audio controllability with natural-language prompts, covering category generation, event counting, event ordering, and timestamp con-trol. AudioTime focuses on temporal audio-text alignment and evaluates whether the generated au-dio follows temporal instructions involving order-ing, duration, frequency, and timestamps. For these benchmarks, we evaluate the non-speech audio generation pathway of Audio-Oscar. Given each benchmark prompt, the system treats it as a sound-event generation request and generates the corresponding audio scene. We adhere to the official evaluation protocols of the two benchmarks. For T2A-bench, we report count accuracy, order-ing accuracy, and timestamp accuracy. We omit the category subset of T2A-bench from the main table. This subset mainly evaluates whether the generated audio contains the sound category specified in the prompt. Since Audio-Oscar explicitly extracts the target category during the planning stage before routing the request to the audio generation mod-ule, evaluating this subset would render the task trivial, failing to provide a rigorous and meaning-ful assessment of the model’s inherent instruction-following behavior. For AudioTime, we report the STEAM metrics for ordering, duration, frequency, and timestamp control. All generated audio clips are saved with the file names required by the offi-cial evaluation scripts, and no reference audio from 14 the test sets is used during generation. 

B.5 Details of Human Subjective Evaluation 

We conducted a subjective listening study to assess the audio generated by our method. To conduct the subjective evaluation, we sampled 10 exam-ples from each subset of ASG-Bench, resulting in a total of 20 audio samples for human evalu-ation. For the text-only subset, we leveraged its comprehensive categorization to construct a care-fully balanced sample set, including two examples per scene modality, five examples per temporal modality, five examples per language, and a mix-ture of four long and six short audio clips. For the subset with reference audio, we randomly sampled 10 examples for evaluation. Human listeners eval-uated each audio sample along three dimensions: Quality, Alignment, and Aesthetic, and also pro-vided an overall score. The instructions shown to participants are presented below. An illustration of the evaluation platform is shown in Figure 6. 

Instructions for Participants 

> Thank you for participating in this audio evaluation. Please read the instructions carefully before starting. Instructions: - Use high-quality headphones and a good soundcard. - Each page shows a text prompt describing a scene, followed by three audio samples generated by different systems. - Listen to all three samples carefully. You may replay them as many times as needed. - Rate each sample on the following four dimensions using a 1--5 scale: Overall: Your overall impression of the audio quality. Quality: Audio fidelity, clarity, noise level, distortion/artifacts, intelligibility, and listening comfort. Alignment: Semantic, temporal, spatial, and scene-coherence consistency between the generated audio and the caption/input scene. Aesthetic: Overall artistic appeal, naturalness of the sound design, emotional impact, and pleasantness. Scoring scale: 1 = Very Poor 2 = Poor 3 = Fair 4 = Good 5 = Excellent

Figure 6: Illustration of the human evaluation platform. Participants are shown a text prompt and three generated audio samples, and are asked to rate each sample along four dimensions. 

C ASG-Bench 

C.1 Overview 

Evaluating audio generation models against com-plex, naturalistic audio scene descriptions presents two challenges: the scarcity of dedicated bench-mark datasets and the inherent difficulty of assess-ing generation quality in the audio domain. Ex-isting benchmarks either focus on isolated sound events, single-track speech synthesis, or music gen-eration, leaving a critical gap in the evaluation of models capable of producing multi-track, tem-porally rich audio scenes that interweave speech, sound effects, music, and environmental ambience. To address this gap, we introduce ASG-Bench , a comprehensive benchmark dataset comprising 601 audio scene descriptions. The dataset is organized into two complementary subsets: Captions with Audio Files , containing 401 entries each paired with a real-world audio recording, and Text-only Caption , containing 200 text-only descriptions, evenly distributed between Chinese and English (100 each). Each entry is meticulously annotated with expected audio events and temporal assertions, enabling preliminary yet structured evaluation of generated audio quality. 

C.2 Dataset Taxonomy C.2.1 Audio Scene Caption (200 Items) 

The Audio Scene Caption subset is constructed along four independent dimensions: scene modal-15 ity, temporal modality, language, and duration. The design ensures linear independence across all di-mensional combinations, yielding a balanced and comprehensive evaluation corpus. 

Scene Modality We categorize audio scenes into five modality classes, with 40 entries per class. Cin-ematic scenes resemble film or action drama ex-cerpts, typically involving rich sonic layers such as dialogue, ambient effects, and background score. 

Narrational scenarios are characteristic of audio-books or narrated documentaries, where a primary speaker describes or tells a story. Environmental 

entries capture everyday or natural environments (e.g., street markets, forests, offices) where ambi-ent sound dominates. Podcast/Broadcast refers to formal or semi-formal spoken content with moder-ate production, often involving multiple speakers or call-in formats. Field Reporting designates on-the-spot recordings of real-world events, capturing authentic and unscripted acoustic environments. 

Temporal Modality We identify two temporal patterns, Parallel and Sequential , with 100 en-tries per class. In parallel class, multiple audio events occur concurrently and interweave, test-ing the model’s ability to orchestrate foreground-background mixing. In sequential class, audio events occur in a clearly ordered manner with dis-tinct transitions, testing timestamp planning and event alignment. 

Language The corpus is bilingual, with 100 en-tries in Chinese and 100 in English . The two language subsets are balanced across all other di-mensional categories. 

Duration We define two duration regimes, Stan-dard and Long . For caption-based audio duration estimation, standard audio clips ranging from 10 to 20 seconds while long audio clips ranging from 45 to 60 seconds. This is specifically reflected in the caption as the size of the text length and the number of speech events. Note that Long-duration entries cannot be Parallel, as the concurrent inter-weaving of multiple audio streams inherently con-strains temporal duration—maintaining coherent foreground-background interleaving over 45–60 seconds is practically infeasible without temporal segmentation, which would violate the Parallel def-inition. 20-25s 25-30s 30-35s 35-40s 40-45s 45-50s 50-55s 55-60s              

> Audio duration bin
> 0
> 80
> 160
> 240
> 320
> 400
> 480
> 560
> 640
> 720
> Count
> 48 63 61 61 40
> 72
> 29 27
> 391
> 542 518 526
> 355
> 634
> 262 254
> 423
> 574 551 558
> 372
> 678
> 269 253
> Audios Audio events Temporal statements

Figure 7: Distribution of Audios, Audio Events and Temporal Statements Across Duration Intervals 

C.2.2 Audio Scene Caption with Reference Audios 

The subset with reference audios of ASG-Bench is constructed based on Omni-Cloze (Ma et al., 2026). Specifically, we first extract audios from the corresponding Omni-Cloze videos to obtain real audio files, and then filter the resulting clips by retaining only those with durations between 20 and 60 seconds. We then replace the blanks in the original passage with their correct answers to get reference video descriptions. To prioritize samples with richer audio information, we count the num-ber of cloze questions involving the audio modality in each sample, sort the samples in descending order accordingly. Then, we use WhisperX to au-tomatically transcribe the extracted audio, provid-ing speech-content references for subsequent audio scene caption generation (Bain et al., 2023). Fi-nally, we employ Qwen3.5-Omni-Plus to generate the audio descriptions (Team, 2026a). The model takes the reference video description, the extracted audio, and the transcribed speech as input, and pro-duces the final audio scene description. After obtaining the audio scene descriptions, we further use an LLM to derive the audio events that should be present in the audio, as well as temporal statements that the audio should satisfy. Specifi-cally, we use DeepSeek-V4-Pro for this annota-tion (DeepSeek-AI, 2026). We then conduct a round of human annotation, where annotators sub-jectively assess the consistency between each audio scene description and the corresponding audio, as-signing a score from 1 to 5. The annotators also verify the correctness of each extracted audio event and temporal statement. Finally, we filter out sam-ples with consistency scores below 4 and remove audio events and temporal statements judged to be incorrect. The distribution of audio clips, tem-poral assertions, and audio events across different duration intervals is shown in Figure 7. 16 C.3 Content Structure 

Each entry in ASG-Bench contains three core com-ponents: a text caption , a set of audio events , and a set of temporal statements . The Audio Scene Caption with Files subset additionally includes a reference audio file. An example is shown in Ta-ble 3. 

Text Caption The caption is a coherent natural-language description of an audio scene. A key annotation principle is that temporal information must be embedded naturally and unobtrusively: over-explicit phrasing (e.g., "the wind starts ex-actly when Jack finishes and ends when singing begins" ) encourages rigid pattern matching but ig-nores natural expression, while complete omission (e.g., "Jack is speaking, the wind is blowing, some-one is singing" ) leaves the model unable to infer event relationships. A well-formed caption natu-rally integrates temporal cues: "Jack finished speak-ing, then a gust of wind swept through, followed by the sound of singing." 

Audio Events Each caption yields a set of atomic audio events (e.g., spoken lines, wind, music). Events serve as the primary evaluation metric, mea-suring whether the generated audio reproduces the expected sound content. 

Temporal Assertions Relationships between events are captured via three assertion types: A after B, A before B, and A overlaps with B. These constitute a secondary evaluation metric, assessing whether the generated audio preserves the intended temporal structure. 

C.4 Evaluation Methodology 

ASG-Bench uses Qwen3.5-Omni-Plus as the audio understanding evaluator (Team, 2026a). Given a generated audio clip, the evaluator is provided with the target caption and the corresponding evaluation annotations, and is instructed to judge only what is actually audible in the generated audio. All evalua-tions in this work are conducted through the official API, with the temperature set to 0.1. Each sample is evaluated once. Since the evaluation is performed via the official API, a small number of samples may fail during evaluation because the model out-put is flagged as containing harmful content. In such cases, we repeatedly evaluate the sample, al-though a few cases may still consistently fail under certain conditions. We evaluate generated audio from two comple-mentary perspectives. First, for Event Coverage ,the evaluator checks each annotated audio event independently and returns a binary judgment indi-cating whether the event is audible or whether an acoustically equivalent event is clearly present in the generated audio. The final event score is com-puted as the average pass rate over all annotated events. Second, for Temporal Consistency , the evaluator checks each temporal statement indepen-dently. These statements describe relations such as before, after, or overlap between events, and the evaluator determines whether each relation is sat-isfied in the generated audio. The final temporal score is computed as the average pass rate over all temporal statements. In addition, we conduct a LALM-based evalua-tion. The evaluator assigns scores on a 1–5 scale along three dimensions: Quality , measuring au-dio fidelity, clarity, artifacts, and listening comfort; 

Alignment , measuring semantic, temporal, spatial, and scene-level consistency with the input descrip-tion; and Aesthetic , measuring artistic appeal, nat-uralness of sound design, emotional impact, and pleasantness. The prompts used for evaluation are shown below. 

Prompt for Audio Events Coverage Evalua-tion 

You are evaluating a generated audio sample for a Text-to-Audio (T2A) task. You will receive the target audio caption and a numbered list of required audio events. And you will receive the generated audio. Your job is to listen to the generated audio and judge whether each required audio event is present in the generated audio. Use the audio caption only as context for what the T2A system was asked to create. Do not mark an event as passed just because it appears in the caption or event list. Judging rules: - passed=true means the event is audible in the generated audio, or an acoustically equivalent event is clearly present. 

17 Component Example 

Text Caption A steady, rhythmic whoosh of ocean waves crashing onto a shore establishes a vast open space from the outset. The narrator’s voice, resonant and old, begins: "The lighthouse keeper had not seen a ship in weeks." The cry of a distant seagull pierces the air, its call echoing. He continues, "The storm was coming; he could feel it in his bones." A heavy gust of wind rattles the windows of the lighthouse, a creaking sound of old wood straining. He says, "He climbed the spiral stairs, his boots heavy on the iron." Each step is a metallic clang, echoing in the stone tower. As he reaches the top, the wind howls more fiercely, blending with the waves. He adds, "He lit the lamp, a single beam cutting through the dark." A soft click of a switch, followed by a low electrical hum, fills the space. The waves crash, the wind groans, and the hum persists. He says, "It was all he could do." The sounds of nature and the lighthouse continue, a symphony of solitude. Audio Events Steady, rhythmic whoosh of ocean waves crashing onto a shore. Resonant and old narrator says "The lighthouse keeper had not seen a ship in weeks." Cry of a distant seagull, echoing. Resonant and old narrator says "The storm was coming; he could feel it in his bones." A heavy gust of wind rattling windows, accompanied by the creaking of old wood straining. Resonant and old narrator says "He climbed the spiral stairs, his boots heavy on the iron." A series of metallic clangs as boots step on iron stairs, echoing in a stone tower. Wind howling fiercely, blending with the waves. Resonant and old narrator says "He lit the lamp, a single beam cutting through the dark." A soft click of a switch, followed by a low electrical hum filling the space. Temporal Statements The rhythmic whoosh of ocean waves crashing overlaps with the narrator’s speech “The light-house keeper had not seen a ship in weeks.” The cry of a distant seagull is heard after the narrator says “The lighthouse keeper had not seen a ship in weeks.” The sound of a heavy gust of wind rattling windows and creaking old wood occurs after the narrator says “The storm was coming; he could feel it in his bones.” The narrator says “He climbed the spiral stairs, his boots heavy on the iron.” after the wind rattling windows and creaking sound. The metallic clanging of footsteps on iron stairs begins after the narrator says “He climbed the spiral stairs, his boots heavy on the iron.” The wind howls more fiercely after the metallic clanging of footsteps. The narrator says “He lit the lamp, a single beam cutting through the dark.” after the wind howls more fiercely. The soft click of a switch is heard after the narrator says “He lit the lamp, a single beam cutting through the dark.” The low electrical hum begins after the soft click of a switch. The low electrical hum overlaps with the narrator saying “It was all he could do.” 

Table 3: An example entry in ASG-Bench. Each entry consists of a natural-language text caption, a set of audio events, and temporal statements describing relationships among events. 

- passed=false means the event is missing, replaced by a meaningfully different sound, or cannot be reasonably confirmed. - Keep each reason short and grounded in what you heard. - confidence must be one of: high, medium, low. Return strict JSON only. Do not use Markdown or code fences. The JSON schema is: {"items": [ {"index": 1, "event": "event text copied 

from the input", "passed": true, "reason": "short reason", "confidence": "high" }]}audio_caption: {audio_caption} audio_events: {audio_events} 

18 Prompt for Temporal Statements Consis-tency Evaluation 

You are evaluating a generated audio sample for a Text-to-Audio (T2A) task. You will receive the target audio caption and a numbered list of temporal or relation statements. And you will receive the generated audio. Your job is to listen to the generated audio and judge whether each statement is satisfied by the generated audio. Use the audio caption only as context for what the T2A system was asked to create. Do not mark a statement as passed just because it appears plausible from the caption. Judging rules: - passed=true means the generated audio clearly satisfies the statement. - passed=false means the generated audio does not satisfy the statement, the relevant sounds are missing, or the statement cannot be reasonably confirmed. - Judge each statement independently. - Keep each reason grounded in what you heard. - confidence must be one of: high, medium, low. Return strict JSON only. Do not use Markdown or code fences. The JSON schema is: {"items": [ {"id": "T1", "statement": "statement text copied from the input", "passed": true, "reason": "short reason", "confidence": "high" }]

}audio_caption: {audio_caption} statements: {statements} 

Prompt for LALM-based Score Evaluation 

You are evaluating a generated audio sample for a subjective Text-to-Audio MOS study. You will receive the target story/audio caption and the generated audio. Please listen to the generated audio and score these three dimensions on a 1-5 scale: - Quality: audio fidelity, clarity, noise level, distortion/artifacts, intelligibility, and listening comfort. - Alignment: semantic, temporal, spatial, and scene-coherence consistency between the generated audio and the caption/input scene. - Aesthetic: overall artistic appeal, naturalness of the sound design, emotional impact, and pleasantness. Scoring scale: 1 = very poor 2 = poor 3 = fair 4 = good 5 = excellent Use the caption as the target content. Judge what is actually audible in the generated audio. Keep reasons grounded in what you heard. Return strict JSON only. Do not use Markdown or code fences. The JSON schema is: 

19 {"quality": { "reason": "reason", "score": 1 }, "alignment": { "reason": "reason", "score": 1 }, "aesthetic": { "reason": "reason", "score": 1 }}caption: {caption} 

20